CAI MON ORCHARD IN BEN TRE PROVINCE
Recalling Ben Tre, people usually recall about coconut - a kind of specific fruit tree of the South of Viet Nam’s river and water region. However, if coming back to Cho Lach district, Ben Tre province, tourists will also be surprised by many special fruit tree styles in Cai Mon orchard.  
Here is also one of tourist sites not being able to miss when having a occasion traveling to Ben Tre. Tourists visiting Cai Mon Orchard does not only enjoy lots of delicious and fresh fruit styles but also see lots of flower and decorative plant styles being the most unique in Ben Tre.
The name of Cai Mon
Coming Cai Mon Orchard, many tourists wander what the name of Cai Mon is. Researchers believe that in the word phrase Cai Mon, Cai means Small irrigation canal in Phu Nam language and Mon means bee honey in Cambodian language. Son Nam Writer – a person focusing to write about the culture of the South of Viet Nam believes that once upon a time, on the banks of Cai Mon canal, there are ruxuliant fruit trees, all year flowers bloom, attracting lot of bees. The name of Cai Mon is understood on that meaning.
Location of Cai Mon Orchard.
Cai Mon Orchard is located in Vinh Thanh Village, Cho Lach District, Ben Tre Province. This tourist site is 40 km from Ben Tre City center. At the city center, Tourists can pass Ham Luong Bridge, then follow Highway 60 about 11 km to arrive in Mo Cay Nam Town. Here tourists can ask Cai Mon Orchard – an attractive tourist site of the Mekong Delta. 
Cai Mon Orchard is the tourist site of the Mekong Delta attracting lots of tourists. Coming Cai Mon Orchard, tourists will be attracted by fresh and green orchards having lots of fruit, especially red ripe rambutan gardens, green strawberry gardens, violet mangosteen gardens, bonbon trees with fruit bunches from root to top. There are citrus, pomelo and longan trees covering all the paths. Tourists themselves can go into gardens pluck and enjoy delicious fragrant ripe fruit. Besides that, following steps of gardeners, tourists are guided how to take care of each kind of tree to have good crops.
Besides fruit, Cai Mon is known to be the homeland lots of flowers such as marigold, daisy, dahlia, carnation and rose. Here, there are also the kinds of precious ornamental trees such as fig tree, acacia and apricot blossom trees. Cai Mon is also place having lots of craftsmen taking care of ornamental trees. They make the trees have unique shapes such as dragon, phoenix and deer shapes. Every year, Cai Mon provides market field of vision of all country hundreds ornamental trees and flower styles and exports to many countries in the world such as Korea, Singapore, Japan.  
Coming Cai Mon orchard, Besides enjoying local styles of fruit, sightseeing seedling establishments and flowers and ornamental trees, tourists try tasting lots of local specialities bringing the South of Vietnam character, relax with the southern amateur music sweet and deep, experience simple rural life when living activities, producing with the people of river and water region. When coming back, tourists can choose the souvenirs of speciality of coconut country to offer friends and relatives.
Traveling Cai Mon Orchard, tourists are in the gentle river and water space, enjoy local fruit at the garden, which must be rememberable thing in life. On the journey traveling the Mekong Delta, Tourists cannot miss opportunity coming over Cai Mon orchard.
