CATCHING CA KEO AND BAKING WITH CHILI SALT
Ca keo is a kind of fish usually living in muddy grounds. In Vietnam, it has lots of in Mekong Delta (the West).
Today my neighboring friend and I go to catch ca keo to bake with chili salt.
The friend and I wear very old clothes because we know that we are going to touch lots of mud. Simply, each person only brings a bucket.
We come to a muddy ground of a mall river near our house. On the ground, there are lots of small hole mouths.
I use my hand to catch fish. The fish holes are about 40 cm deep. Our clothes are full of mud, which make me very interested. My friend shouts once he gets a fish. Each of us gets half an bucket of fish soon.
Putting the buckets under a tree, we jump into the river. River water makes me feel cool. We take a bath joking happily.
We return home to make baking ca keo dish.
My elder sister helps us do this. She puts some fish into a pot and put some ice and salt. She shakes lightly for 5 minutes. The fish spit out dirty things in the belly. Then she washes them well. 
At the same time, my friend goes to a rivulet to cut down some water coconut leaves. After that, we get leaf veins.
My sister puts leaf veins into the mouths of the fish and threads through their bodies. At that time, my friend and I prepare the stove.
My sister puts the fish on the stove with charcoal burning. Waiting some minutes, she plasters the mixture of salt water, chili and sodium glutamate, which she prepared before. The mixture get into the fish soon. We have chili salt baked ca keo dish.
We lay the food on the table put under a mango tree. On the table, beside the fish are a plate of fish sauce and a plate of fresh vegetables.
I invite my parents to enjoy the food with us. All family together eats happily.
The ca keo meat is sweet and fat, so delicious. I eat forever without losing appetite. 
The story now finishes. We are going to write many more stories with the topic the West flavor. Would you like to read the next story? 

 
