CHA TAM CHURCH
Cha Tam Church (officially known as the Church of St. Francisco Javier) is an old church built in 1900 and completed in 1902. Many people said that this was the only church in the city decorated  like  Chinese temples’style.
The church looked from the font
The church looked from the side
History
Looking the Chinese Vietnamese Christians had no places to pray, Admiral Lagrandière who was then the Governor of South Vietnam, ordered the Department of Public Works to use the public money to build a church.
With the support of the government, the Bishop Despierre sent Priest  Pierre d 'Assou, Dam a to in Chinese, Cha Tam in Vietnamese sound to buy a piece of large land. The land has area of 3 hectares, locates  on Tran Hung Dao street, near Le Chau Assembly hall, in Blacksmith village, Cholon center.
On the third of December 1900 , the celebration day of Saint Francisco Javier, Bishop  Saigon region named Mossard came to carry out the ceremony putting the first stone. Therefore the temple was named after the Santa’s. The next two years, on the tenth of January 1902 the opening celebration was carried out solemnly.
However, Because  Priest  Pierre d’ Assou is the person who controled building the church and is also the first Vicar, so people usually call to be  Cha Tam Church.
After that, Cha Tam also controled  building a school, an orphanage, some flats for rainting. In 1934, Cha Tam passed away, was buried right beside the wall, near the gate of the church.
In 1990, the church bell tower was fixed and the Christ altar was renewed.
Architecture
Generally the church has Gothique design, the same as European church’s, but it still has the Chinese culture style. The gate is built after three-arched-entrance gate model. The name of the church is written in Chinese scripts. The roof is covered with ying and yang tilets. Two side of the ross has two carps. The tops of the church is put lotuses. Two scripts lines on two sides of the gate are written in Chinese scrips. The four pillars in the main worship place is painted red color, which doesn’t have  in the christian churches. The Place hanging Christ Jesus’ picture has 2 script lines is written in chinese scripts.
More information 
On the first of November 1963, the military overthrow broke out, Present Ngo Dinh Diem  and his younger brother, Adviser Ngo Dinh Nhu of  Repuplic of Viet Nam regime in South Viet Nam came and stayed at a house of a  Chinese Vietnamese named Ma Tuyen in Cho Lon area.
Next morning, The second of November 1963 , The two men came to the church to pray before giving themselves to overthrow side. However both of them were killed by an officer of the overthrow force just on the way  convoying from Cha Tam church to the General staft.  
Address: 25 Hoc Lac, District 5, HCMC.



