9 Special Festivals in Ho Chi Minh City
Ho Chi Minh City is an exciting city, full of energy and the biggest economical center in Vietnam. In addition, Ho Chi Minh City is also the place concentrating many Chinese people, Khmer people and so on, so it is a variety of cultures and customs.
The festivals here have own meaning and character, cannot mix the others in the country. 
1. The Earth God Temple Festival:
Time: February 2th of the lunar calendar.
Site: 125 Le Loi Street, Ward 3, Go Vap District, HCMC.
The Earth God Temple Festival is organized to respect Phuc Duc Chinh God with other folk gods. We can say that this is the typical festival for temple festival in Ho Chi Minh City and South Vietnam about ceremonies such as striking drum to open festival, inviting betel with folk opera to welcome gods to go back to attend the festival and performing comedy. Next, dancing gold trays, silver trays performed by folk artists. Ending of the festival is giving lucky present (loc in Vietnamese).
2. Jewel Occupation ancestor anniversary celebration:
Time: From 6th to 8th of February of the lunar calendar.
Site: 586 Tran Hung Dao Street, District 5, HCMC.
The festival is organized with large scale, attracts thousands of craftsmen of jewel occupation which are not only in Ho Chi Minh City but also the provinces of South Vietnam.
The festival aims to show the gratitude of the craftsmen to ancestor having merit in founding jewel occupation. The ceremony is organized in accordance with traditional ceremony.
3. Ky Yen Festival at Binh Dong Communal House:   
Time: From 10th to 14th of February of the lunar calendar.
Site: Ward 7, District 8, Ho HCMC.
The festival is held with ceremonies: Tuc Yet (the ceremony inviting gods coming back to witness the festival), Xay Chau (the ceremony performing opera), Chanh Te (the main ceremony) and so on. When the festival comes, thousands of people go back to pray, even far provinces such as Long An, Dong Thap.
4. Phan Cong Hon Temple Festival:
Time: February 25th of lunar calendar every year.
Site: Ba Diem Commune, Hoc Mon District, HCMC. 
The festival is organized with the purpose to respect Phan Cong Hon who leaded people in 18 Betel garden villages struck the district chief palace in 1885. The anniversary celebration is held in accordance with god offering ceremony.  
5. Lady Thien Hau Pagoda Festival:                                  
Time: March 23th of the lunar calendar.
Site: 710 Nguyen Trai, District 3, HCMC.
Thien Hau Pagoda is an ancient pagoda of Chinese people in Cholon, HCHC.
The pagoda is the place gathering so many Chinesse Vietnamese. The Lady Festival aims to respect Thien Hau Lady who helped Chinese people cross the sea, settled in a new land area, Vietnam. In addition, people pray to the Lady for peace and prosperous.
6. Gentleman Pagoda Festival:
Time: June 24th of lunar calendar.
Time: 676 - 678 Nguyen Trai, District 5, HCMC.
Gentleman Pagoda (Quan Wu Ancient Temple) has the architectural design in the early 19 century and the late 20 century.
It is the place worshiping Quan Wu (a general in Three Kingdom period) and many gods of Teochew Chinese people in Saigon. 
Gentleman Pagoda Festival includes of many ceremonies such as offering incenses, bathing statues, dancing lion, performing folk opera with wishing health and peace.
7. Lang Ong – Ba Chieu Festival:
Time: 30/7 - 1/8 of lunar calendar.
Site: Ward 1, Binh Thanh District, Binh Thanh District, HCMC..
Lang Ong – Ba Chieu  Festival is organized in accordance with Ky Yen Festival  (a festival is held at the village temple every year. Ky yen means peace wishing). It has enough ceremonies such as Tuc Yet (the ceremony inviting gods coming back to witness the festival), Xay Chau (the ceremony performing opera), Chanh Te (the main ceremony) and so on.
During 4 festival days, tens of thousands of people everywhere in which there are even Chinese people go back the Ta Quan Le van Duyet Temple.
Le Van Duyet mausoleum area is recognized Historical and Cultural Site Protected at the National Level in 1988.
8. Ong Bon Pagoda Festival:
Time: August 15th of the lunar calendar.
Site: Hai Thuong Lang Ong Street, District 5, HCMC.
Ong Bon Pagoda Festival aims to respect characters such as Ong Bon, Quan wu,  avalokitesvara Bodhisattva and so on. Offerings offering Ong Bon are usually roasted pig, fresh pig, boiled chicken, fruit and flower, incense and light and so on. People coming here are usually Fujian Chinese. Chinese people usually offer circle incenses that spread perfume all the ceiling through many months.
9. Whale Festival:
Time: August 15th-17th 
Site: Can Thanh Commune, Can Gio District, HCMC.
Whale Festival is a festival having special color of the fishers in the sea area. In Whale Festival, the important and mean ceremony is Gentleman Greeting Ceremony.
The festival is the opportunity to the fishers showing the gratitude to Ong (the word to call whales respectably) that helps the fishers overcome big winds. Besides, this is a chance for them to pray for peace when going in the sea and catch many fishes and shrimps.