Cylindrical Glutinous Price Cake 
Cylindrical glutinous rice cake or Banh Tet is one of traditional dishes at Tet in Central Vietnam and Southern Vietnam.
Banh Tet has origin over 800 years ago, when the ancestor of Vietnam people just went to break fresh ground toward south. 
Banh Tet is cylinder shaped. It has many sizes. Generally, it has sizes: big, medium, small. A cake having medium size has height of about 20, 2 cm, bottom side of about 8 cm.
Outside Banh Tet is 2 banana-leaf layers, inside is a layer of glutinous rice mixing coconut milk and end is pie. Banh Tet is tied with banana-leaf nerve in regular distance very nice.
Basing on materials and producing place, people name for kinds of Banh Tet. 
Two common kinds of Banana Pie Banh Tet and Green Pea Pie Banh Tet. People can add fat pork or lean and fat pork into green pea pie. Its service life is four days.
In Tay Ninh Province, there is Black Pea Banh Tet. It is the same as Green Pea Pie Banh Tet, but there are many black peas in glutinous rice layer. Its service life is four days.
In Can Tho City, there is La Cam Banh Tet. Glutinous rice part is mixed with la cam juice (la cam is a kind of leaf having violet color usually used to mix with flour and sugar to make cake and candy) and coconut milk. Pie is lean and fat pork and salted duck egg. Service life of La Cam Banh Tet is seven days 
In Tra Vinh Province, there is Tra Cuon Banh Tet. Glutinous rice part is mixed with la chum ngot (la chum ngot is a kind of leaf having green color usually used to cook soup) and coconut milk. Pie is lean and fat pork and salted duck egg. Service life of Tra Cuon Banh Tet is seven days
In Ben Tre, there is Chu Banh Tet (Letter Cylindrical glutinous rice cake). Glutinous rice part is mixed with la cam or la dua (a kind of leaf having green color and perfumed smell) and coconut milk. Pie is letters made from green pea. The letters put into the cake contain lucky meaning. Service life of Chu Banh Tet is seven days. 
When eating Banh Tet, you use sharp knife to cut into circles, next peel banana leaf layers to eat. You can also use thread to cut the cake.
If you like to eat sweet, you can eat the cake with white sugar. If you like to eat salt, you can eat with delicious fish sauce. You can also eat with sour vegetables such as pickled scallion heads, vinegar soaked onions.
In the old days, every year, on New Year’s Eve, every Vietnamese family cooked Banh Chung or Banh Tet. Cooking the cakes lasted about five or six hours. It was happy to stay up to watch Banh Tet pot.  The weather at Tet was rather cold, so red fire stove made the members in family warmer. everybody sits, talking together joyfully.
Today, Society is changing toward specialty, so there are many makers of Banh Tet to sell in Central Vietnam and Southern Vietnam, there are not many families making the cake as the past. However, Banh Tet is always present on Tet days.
In opinion of Vietnamese people, the objects in the nature, nothing is more precious than rice. Therefore, using the cake made from rice to offer Gods and ancestor shows the respect of Vietnamese people to them. 
Besides, People in Central Vietnam and South Vietnam use Banh Tet as a gift to offer relatives and friends. Banh Tet are always tied into each pair to offer. People always wish their relatives and friends always getting fully satisfactory results.  
Generally, If in Northern Vietnam, peach blossom and square glutinous rice cake are symbol for Tet, In South Vietnam, apricot blossom and Cylindrical glutinous rice cake are symbol for Tet.


 

