Experiences traveling in Ben Tre
Ben Tre Province is located in Mekong Delta of Vietnam. This place has an interlacing river system. It is not only famous for revolution country but also coconut country. Ben Tre coconut water is very sweet and fragrant. Coconut milk is used to make coconut candy.
We are from Ben Tre, so we know very clearly about it. Following is some experiences that we want to share with you.
When do you go to Men Tre? 
With warm climate all year, it is convenient to travel any time. However May, June and July period is the best traveling time. At that time, there are tens of fruit kinds as mangosteen, durian, rambutan, guava, jackfruit, star apple, papaya and so on. Besides enjoying these fruit kinds, you can take many photos here.
How long do you travel Ben Tre?
Because the area is not large, you can discover famous sites in Ben Tre for 2 days. You can book Ben Tre tour or travel yourselves.
How do you go to Ben tre?
The center of Ben Tre province is about 90 km from Ho Chi Minh City. It takes 2 hours and a half to go to Ben Tre by car. If you go yourselves, you can buy ticket at West Coach Station. The ticket price is about 80,000 VND.
Where in Ben Tre do you travel?
Ben Tre has 3 mean traveling sites. Those are Phung Islet beside Rach Mieu, Cai Mon Orchard in Cho Lach District, Nguyen Dinh Chieu Tomb in Ba Tri District.
In Phung Islet or Coconut Monk Islet, you can discover the strange life of a monk who used to 
live here before 1975. You can also visit orchards and bee raising farm here. In addition to, you can take yourselves many photos to have memory.
In Cho Lach Orchard, you go in to garden and pick up fruit yourselves. Here there are some tents covered with water coconut leaves. You can sit relaxing and ask for some the countryside dishes.
In Nguyen Dinh Chieu Tomp, you get to know about the life and career of country loving poet Nguyen Dinh Chieu clearly.
Above are some Ben Tre traveling experiences.  If you have a chance, come to visit Ben Tre. Certainly, you will have wonderful experiences in your itinerary.


