HO CON RUA (TORTOISE LAKE), DESTINASTION OF SO MANY PEPPLE
Ho Con Rua, whose official name is Cong Truong Quoc Te, is the common people name of a roundabout having water tower. It connects three roads: Vo Van Tan, Pham Ngoc Thach and Tran Cao Van and is located in Distric 1, Ho Chi Minh City.
Do you wonder why the traffic-circle is called to be Ho Con Rua while this place does not have any tortoise here? What reason has Ho Con Rua? Why so many people come here?
This writing will answer your question.
People call this place to be Ho Con Rua because there was a tortoise statue on the lake before.
The event building Ho Con Rua connects closely with the construction of Dinh Doc Lap (Independence palace).
According to common people, on 1967, when General Nguyen Van Thieu started to become the president of Republic of South Vietnam, he invited a Chinese fen sui master to watch the land position of Dinh Doc Lap. The master praised that the position was on the head of long mach (dragon source. That is a good layer of earth.). Therefore, Dinh Doc Lap was also called to be Phu Dau Rong (dragon head palace). 
The long mach had dragon form was asleep. The tag of the dragon was 1km from Dinh Doc Lap. It was on Cong Truong Chien Si (the name of Ho Con Rua before.) Every time the tortoise woke up, it would swish the tail, and things built on this long mach would totally collapse.
Therefore, President ordered to build the lake with a tortoise statue. He hoped it could keep the tag of the dragon so that it did not swish when it woke up. Therefore, the central area of the lake had a tortoise statue made from metal with a stone stele on its back. The construction of Ho Con Rua had 5 pillars which came into being a tower. The shape of the tower is the same as a sword (or a nail) knocked down the lake to keep dragon tail closely.
In spite of preventing carefully like that, in 1975, Republic of South Vietnam still collapsed.
In 1978, a group of people installed bomb to destroy the tortoise. The tortoise has not existed since then.
Ho con Rua has a very beautiful shape. The around scenery is also very charming. In the neighborhood, there are some Universities. There are long roads with green trees and cool shades. All make up an ideal entertaining area. 
Since Ho Con Rua was built, many Saigon people have come here to see the sight or take photos. This place has also ever witnessed so many romantic love affairs.
Although the tortoise has been disappeared, but Ho Con Rua still remain there as a witness of history. It is also the destination of many Vietnamese people in the country, oversea Vietnamese, tourists, researchers, especially the young. 


 
 




