HOI AN ANCIENT TOWN TRAVEL GUIDE
Hoi An ancient Town is located in Quang Nam province, Central Vietnam. Quan Nam is from Ha Noi 883km to South, from Ho Chi Minh City 887km to North, from Da Nang Airport 35km. It is an ancient town as called name. It is beside poetic Thu Bon River. It is famous for affiliation of many different cultures and the architectural monument exists almost integrally. It was recognized as a world heritage by UNESCO.
Thanking to advantageous geography elements, Hoi An used to be a crowded international trade port. This is the place meeting business ships of Japan, China and West throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In the nineteenth century, because Da Nang trade port was developed, Hoi An market port got worse and worse. Hoi An was lucky not to be destroyed in the two wars and avoid urbanizing process strongly at the end of twentieth century. In 1980s,the town was noticed by scholars and tourists, which have made it become one of attractivetourist sites in Vietnam.
Hoi An Ancient Town includes many houses, societys premises, shrines, wells, bridges, houses of cult, markets, ports, narrow streets with square shapes the same as a chessboard. The landscape of Hoi An Town covers anancient lichen color. 
The constructions were built after Chinese, Japanese, French, traditional Vietnamese designs.
Besides various architecturalcultural values, Hoi An still saves an rather colossal immaterial culture. Daily living of inhabitants with customs, credence activities, folk art, cultural festivals preserved and promoted and poetic natural landscape, traditional job villages, special dishes make Hoi An become attractive site of visitors all over the world.
Ancient houses being character of Hoi An Ancient Town
Above is general knowledge of Hoi An Ancient Town. In order to understand and enjoy what it has, now we take a trip to this place.
Before coming to Hoi Ancient Town, let’s book a room in a hotel. We can choose the refreshing zone in Cua Dai (Big Door) seaside. The evening here we are seen hundreds of flower lamps flow along the stream.These flower lamps were sopped by the travel organizers. 
After a relaxing night, we continue the route discovering Hoi An Ancient Town.
Firstly, we canvisit Bridge Pagoda or Chua Cau, the symbol of Hoi An ancient town. People call it pagoda because on the bridge, there is a shrine. Bridge Pagoda passes a rivulet flowing out Thu Bon River. It was built by Japanese businesses in about fifteenth century with rather special architecture. The roof was coveredwith ying and yang tiles. Pagoda and bridge were built from wood painted red and yellow and carved skillfully. Bridge Pagoda is used not only for going and worshiping but also for meeting villagers which show community life.
Bridge Pagoda or Chua Cau
After visiting Bridge Pagoda, we discover an ancient house. In front of us is a stony screen; its surface was carvedtwo tiger pictures skillfully. The screen has purpose to stop the wind and make thehouse warmer. Passing the screen we see a three-compartment house. Right behind the main door, there is another screen. It was made from some pieces of wood. The surface of each piece was carved dragon or phoenix picture minutely. In front of the screen is a set of table and chairs carved skillfully. Next is an ancestor altar inlaided with mother-of-pearl with bird and animal pictures very beautifully. Above the altar is a horizontal lacquered board with writing line in Chinese. It has the meaning singing the praise of the ancestor. The pillars have parallel sentences showing the dream of the ancient people. Generally, all furniture in the house has meaning. The house has inherited from generation to generation. The host is very interested in communicating us.
In the evening, we can go to the Thu Bon river bank to sop flower lamps. What beautiful flower lamps glistening on the water surface. After that we visit lantern stores. In Hoi An Ancient Town, there are tens of stores selling lanterns, let’s go into one. The lanterns have many shapes, sizes, colors, prices. The shopkeeper is willing to explain. Besides, she shows us how to make a lantern. We can buy some ones to decorate our houses or present relatives and friends. The lanterns are stowed before we put into our bags. Having many lanterns is a character of Hoi An ancient town.
Leaving the store selling lanterns, we come back the hotel to relax. 
The sun is shining, we prepare for an interesting new day. Firstly we visit PhucKien societys premises(PhucKien is a branch of Chinese). This is a meeting place of Chinese before. In the house, there are some god statues, especially ThienHauThanh Mau’s. ThienHauThanh Mau is a female god. Chinese coming Hoi An before had to pass the sea difficultly. Coming here they thought that shehad helped them avoid waves, winds and fierce fish.
After PhucKien societys premises, we visit the village making potteries. Coming here, we see many domestic appliances made very skillfully. We can make simple things ourselves for example cooker, bowl, flower vase
In the evening, we can come performing site Hat Bai Choi, a traditional music kind of the Central Vietnam. The gesture of actors looksvery graceful andfunny.
Coming Hoi An, we do not forget to enjoy special dishes here, especially Cao Lau and Mi Quang. Cao Lau is a noodle style having yellow threads and eaten with shrimps, pork, fresh vegetables and a little stickwater. Mi Quang is the same as Cao Lau but it is eaten with chicken.
We have experienced a fully interesting trip.
Today Hoi Anhas not had the airport. Therefore, tourists can come to Da Nang Airport. Then tourists go by land by means such as: car, taxi, bus, motorbike taxi.Connect with us two know more information. Our web site: