Which Pagodas in Saigon to visit at Tet
Most Vietnamese people follow Buddhism. On the first day of Tet (official Tet holiday lasts for three days) Vietnamese people usually go to visit pagodas and pray for lucky things in new year. It is a great idea for tourists to visit pagodas at Tet like locals. Coming to peaceful pagodas, it is a big chance to see Buddha sitting on lotus base with gentle face and hear bell sound. There you will feel calm, all the trouble in daily life temporarily is gone. Besides, you can admire Vietnamese beautiful ancient architecture and learn more about our rich culture. Which Pagodas in Saigon to visit at Tet. Followings are some famous pagodas in Saigon (former name of HCMC) to visit at Tet:
1. Giac Lam – The oldest pagoda in Saigon.
Giac Lam Pagoda is located at118 Lac Long Quan, Ward 10, Tan Binh District. The pagoda is open in 1774. It is one of pagodas built most early in Gia Dinh (the name of HCMC before). It has many ancient statues and documents of history, culture, art, architecture, sculpture.
2. Vinh Nghiem Pagoda – Place having the highest tower built from stone in Viet Nam.
Vinh Nghiem Pagoda is located at 339 Nam Ky Khoi Nghia, Ward 7, District 3. Vinh Nghiem Pagoda is a big one in Saigon. Besides, it has the highest tower built from stone in Vietnam. It has seven floors with total height of l14m. The pagoda was built from 1964 to 1971. Its name and model are the same as a pagoda in Bac Giang province, north Vietnam built in the eleventh century, in Ly dynasty.
3. Hoang Phap – the pagoda famous for Buddhist- training courses.
Hoang Phap Pagoda is located in Tan Hiep Commune, Hoc Mon District. Hoang Phap Pagoda is famous for attracting Buddhists who come for sightseeing and attending the Buddhist training courses. Attendees are guided how to look after themselves, love, undergoing hard trials here.
4. Xa Loi – The pagoda having the highest bell tower in Vietnam.
Xa Loi Pagoda is located at 89 Ba Huyen Thanh Quan, Ward 7, District 3 and was open in 1961. Xa Loi Pagoda is famous for beautiful architecture and landscape. Its bell tower is the highest in Vietnam. It is 32 m high and has 7 floors. The bell is 2 tons of weight and hung on the highest floor. Its sound propagates very far. The pagoda is for worshiping xa loi of the Buddha, so it is named Xa Loi pagoda. It is the first pagoda to build with new architecture. The front is for worshiping, and the back is for teaching the reason of Buddha.
5. Nam Thien Nhat Tru – One Pillar Pagoda in South Vietnam.
Nam Thien Nhat Tru is at 511 Dang Van  Bi, Binh Tho ward, Thu Duc District. Besides the famous One Pillar Pagoda in Hanoi, Saigon also has a similar place. That is Nam Thien Nhat Tru called normally One Pillar Pagoda in South Vietnam. It is built by Monk Thich Tri Dung in 1958. Nam Thien Nhat Tru has model the same as Thang Long Nhat Tru(One Pillar Pagoda in Hanoi), but lower and smaller. The pagoda stands in the middle of Long Nhan Lake with lotuses on water.
6. Ngoc Hoang – The  ancient pagoda built after Chinese pagoda s style.
Ngoc Hoang Pagoda is locates at 73, Mai Thi Luu, District 1. It is a built by a monk named Luu Minh. He is from Quang Dong, China and came here in the early century 20. It is an ancient temple built after Chinese pagoda s style. The main shrine worships Ngoc Hoang (the Creator) and other gods. Coming Ngoc Hoang Pagoda, we will know little about Chinese architecture and understand the credence of people coming here. This is the only pagoda visited by President Barack Obama while he was staying Vietnam.