A TRIP OF NHA TRANG - DA LAT
Because of the good study result, last summer my parents offered me a Nha Trang - Dalat sightseeing.
On the eve of the trip, I could not sleep because of being going to visit the Places I had used to dream.
We started in Ben Tre at five o’clock in the morning and arrived in Nha Trang at three o’clock in the afternoon. Coming there, we chose a hotel at the center of the city.
After one hour for relaxing, we went to the beach. This season was summer but the climate here was very cool. We had occasion to soak the body in pure blue seawater. The wave here was not big. It did not make me fearful as the wave in Vung Tau. After swimming satisfactorily, we lied stretched out on the soft sand. I felt comfortable like lying on the mattress. The night was coming. The rays of the sun shone the sky above the western horizon. I saw a ship passing the sea surface just on the horizon. It was not until it had not a person left, we left the beach.
In the evening, we went for a walk around the hotel and enjoyed some seafood. We ate bun cha ca (grilled fish noodle soup) nem (pork hash wrapped in bananaleaf), banh xeo muc (Vietnamese cuttle pancake). The food here was very delicious but cheap. Eating,  drinking satisfactorily, we came back to the hotel to refresh.
The next day we visited Tri Nguyen Aquarium. We saw sharks, dolphins and turtles. We saw many different types of fish. I thought the colorful little fish were the most beautiful.
There was a souvenir shop near the exit of the aquarium. My parents bought me a cap. It had a picture of dolphin on it. After that, we visited the fishing village and the pagoda nearby. Finally, we came back to the hotel.
The following morning, we left Nha Trang for Da Lat. After five hours, we arrived in Da Lat.  
Hear, we felt cool as being in the air-conditioned room. The first day, we visited Da Lat Flower Garden. It is 2km from the Da Lat City.
Just gettting off the car, I was extremely surprised to see the hoop gate made from thousands of vases of colorful flowers.
Passing the gate, I saw a very impressive faucet system.
Looking around, everywhere was completely flowers. There were hundreds of beautiful flowers such as daisy, rose, tulip, sunflower, carnation, mimosa.
Next, I saw large dragon-bone tree garden. My father said the dragon bone trees here were from remote Africa. 
Then, I watched the orchid gaden. The orchids here had a lot of styles and colors, which attracted me a lot. My mother chose a pot. We were instructed the way to look after warmly by the seller. 
We had to stop for relaxing because the garden was very large. My mother said the area of it was 7,000 m and it was the largest flower garden in Viet Nam.
Leaving Flower Garden, we visited Than Tho Lake and Two-Tom Pine Hill. We stopped at Two-tomb Pine Hill rather long.
Two-tomb Pine Hill was beside Than Tho Lake. It was a flat hill with green pine trees. Nothing was as interesting as hearing the wind flowing, the pines rang. Especially we saw two tombs were on a vacant land. On the tombs, there were many flowers. My father said those were tombs of two people loving each other. The girl was named Thao and the boy was named Tam. Before 1954, two people fell in love, but their families did not allowed them go to marriage. Because of being sad, the boy went into the army. People rumored that he was dead in battle. Hearing that, the girl was extremely painful and came to Than Tho lake to kill herself. Arriving from battle, the boy heard she had been dead, he killed himself, too. The story made mom and me shed tears.