PICKING Basa FRUITS AND COOKING SOUR SOUP OF BASA FISH
Basa is a kind of the trees growing on the grounds of a river. The highest tree is about 20m and the diameter is about 50cm. The small branches of them are long and soft. the fruits are round and flat and taste sour.
Today my aunt, uncle, cousin and me  go to pick ban fruits and cook sour soup with them.
Our boat goes along the Ham Luong River. Two sides of the river are two rows of water coconut. We arrive in Ban Islet soon. In front of my eyes is a ban forest. There are white-stork flocks in ban trees. When we come nearby, they suddenly fly up. We stop at a Ban tree having a lot of fruits. I see big ban fruits with diameter of about 6 cm. There are even small fruits and flowers. 
I pick a big fruit and cut the petal underneath it. Then I dip it into shrimp paste that I have brought with me. The fruit tastes sour and acrid. The shrimp paste tastes sweet and salty. Thanks to shrimp paste, the fruit is less sour.
I pick some more fruits to cook the sour soup of basa fish. We go boating to Crocodile Rivulet Mouth. My grandfather told that there were many crocodiles here 100 year ago. We cook the dish just on the boat. 
First, I wash ban fruits well. 
Then I pour water into a pot and heat it. 
Next, I put the fruits into the pot. 
After that, I prepare basa fish, some vegetables like pineapple and bean sprouts.
Next, I take the fruits from the pot.  
After that, I put the fish and the vegetables into the pot
Next, I take the outside part of the ban fruits and take milk part of them. 
Finally, I pour ban milk into the pot.
Waiting some minutes, we have a sour soup of basa fish cooked with ban fruit then. 
We lay the food including a large bowl of sour soup and a plate of clear fish sauce on the hood of boat. We start enjoying the dish. The water of the sour soup is the same as milk and tastes sour and sweet. The basa fish meat tastes fat and fragrant. 
We have just had an interesting trip. In the next day, we will continue making more other report about the west aromatic flavour, would you like to welcome.
   