THE ACTIVITIES IN AND AROUND VIETNAMESE NEW YEAR
Tet Nguyen Dan usually called shortly Tet or Vietnamese New Year is the most important mannual celebration in Vietnam. Tet happens three days, from the first to the third of the first month of lunar calendar.
At the beginning of the lunar twelfth month, Vietnamese people look forward toTet. Following we will discover the activities in and around Tet.
Some months before Tet, gardeners prepare flowers, ornamental plants for Tet. Bake and sweet-making houses also work busily. Before 1975, because traffic condition and business was still limited, households made bakes and sweets themselves. In the countryside, at night, we heard the sound of the pestles everywhere. In front of the houses, we saw lengths drying paper cakes. We also heard the sound of firecrackers somewhere in the neighborhood.
From the tenth to the twenty-fifth, every family go to clean tombs of death relatives. Vietnamese people think “song cai nha, chet cai mo”. This expression means when people are alive, the most necessary living condition is a house. when people are dead, the most necessary condition for resting is a tomb. Before enjoying Tet, People clean and decorate their house, they also do that for death relatives.
On the twenty-third of the twelfth, Vietnamese people hold the ceremony of saying goodbye to Ong Tao or Kitchen King to the paradise. People Vietnamese have a folk tale about OngTao.
Formerly, there was a very poor pair. The husband was name Trong Cao. The wife was named Thi Nhi. They had lived together for a long time but not having had any children. Therefore, they were usually sad and argued each other. One day Trong Cao was so angry that he struck his wife. Being angry, Thi Nhi left home, then met a man named Pham Lang. He used sweet words to attract her. She agreed to be his wife. When the anger was over, Trong Cao went to look for Thi Nhi everywhere, but not finding any news. He was very upset, left house and job and became a beggar to look for his wife.
One day, Trong Cao came a rich family to beg. The female householder brought rice giving him. She herself was Thi Nhi . Two people realized each other. They could not forget former love. Th? Nhi regretted having got Pham Lang to be a husband. They were talking to each other , accidentally the new husband, Pham Lang came back from the paddy field. Thi Nhi told Trong Cao to hide inside a heap of straws. Pham Lang burned straws in order to have ashes to manure a field. Trong Cao died of fire. The former wife Thi Nhi saw that, rushed into the fire to be dead with him. Ph?m Lang saw his wife was dead, he also rushed into the fire to be dead with her.
The Deity found that the three people are faithful each other, he conferred the title Tao Quan on them and appointed each person a job
Generally, three gods are responsible for looking for housework for each household. Besides, they examine whole things of family and every year ride carps flying back the paradise to report to the king of heaven. 
The offering of the ceremony in North Vietnam consists of three sets of clothes for Ong Tao made of paper, three carps, rice, meat, fruit, …The offering in South Vietnam is more simple, only flowers, fruit, cakes and jam. 
From the twentieth to the thirtieth, the flower markets all over the country act busily.
In Ho Chi Minh, there are three famous and the biggest flower markets. Those are Ho Thi Ky Flower Market, Dam Sen Flower Market, and Hau Giang Flower Market. The flower markets never “slept”, especially these flower markets are busy between midnight and early in the morning. The markets provide many kinds of nice flowers such as marigold, chrysanthemum, gladiolus, apricot-blossom (In South Vietnam, apricot-blossom symbols for spring
In Hanoi Capital, There are three nice, famous and unique markets. Those are Hang Luoc Lower Market, Hoang Hoa Tham Flower Market, Lac Long Quan Flower Market. The flowers here come from many places from Sapa, Dalat, to the Southwest of Vietnam, even outside of Vietnam. The flower markets cannot be short of peach-blossoms. If in South Vietnam, apricot symbols for spring, In North Vietnam, peach-blossom symbols for this season. In Vietnam two words “xuan”(spring) and Tet seem the same meaning. Welcoming “xuan” is also welcoming Tet.
People go for a walk in a flower market to experience spring atmosphere coming back, take photos or choose the nicest flowerpots for their families.
Usually, about the lunar twenty-seventh, all cadres, officers and workers have days off. They clean, decorate houses and go shopping for Tet. The people who are far from home hurriedly come back hometown to enjoy Tet.
On the thirtieth, people welcome Ong Tao home. On this day, they also welcome the ancestor home to enjoy Tet with the descendant. The ceremony welcoming the ancestor is very solemn. The offering has to have a five-fruit tray. According to Eastern philosophy, the five kinds of fruit symbol for five basic elements: metal, wood, water, fire and earth, which are used to make the Universe. The five kinds of fruit also show dream of people. Besides the five-fruit tray there are square glutinous rice cakes and round sticky rice cakes, watermelons, rice, meat, fish…When the offering is ready, the descendant stands in front of the altar praying. After that, the members of the family eat and drink, talking one another happily.
On New Year’s Eve, all family do not sleep to welcome a new year. Early in the evening, they prepare the offering for the watch-night time ceremony. The offering consists of bakes, jam and fruit. Right midnight, they burn incense to pray God and Buddha for a good new year.
Vietnamese people have the expression relating to Tet days mung mot nha cha, mung hai nha chu, mung ba nha thay. This expression means on the first day, people are in the father’s house, on the second people are in the uncle’s one and on the third, people are in the teachers one. A family in Vietnam has three generations grandparents, parents, and children. On the first, all of them usually have to stay at home in order to donate ancestor. The Children wish longevity the parents and grandparents. They are always received small red envelopes with lucky money inside from their grandparents and parents. On the second, people go to visit relatives. They are very glad to meet one another. They ask about the business in the last year and give one another the best wishes. On the third, people come to visit their teachers. In Vietnam, people think high of teachers because they influenced Confucianism. Confucianism has a sentence king, master, father The tradition respecting masters and morals still save in Vietnamese spirit.
On the days before Tet and in Tet, the centers of cities, provinces and districts have spring flower festivals. People usually focus into these places to go for a walk, admire sights and take photographs.
On the fourth, every family celebrates a ceremony saying good-bye to their ancestor. This ceremony is as solemn as the welcome one. Children and grandchildren are present enough. Every year, about on the twenty-sixth, all cadres, officers and workers have to go to work again.
Although Tet is over, the atmosphere of Tet still lasts. People still go to visit relatives, friends and enjoys parties one another. The time after Tet Nguyen Dan is also the time when many traditional festivals happen, attracting attention and participation of numerous tourists. Huong Pagoda Festival occurs from the sixth of the first month to the third month. Yen Tu Festival, Quang Ninh province begins from the tenth of the first month. Lim Festival starts from the thirteenth of the first month. Tran Temple Festival occurs from the thirteen to the fifteenth of the first month. There are some festivals left, if there are occasions, we will study more.
The above is some activities in Tet Nguyen Dan and around it. They show the happiness reuniting relatives and friends, dream having many good things in new year, gratitude to ancestor, teachers, grandparents and parents.