The biggest celebrations of Hoa Hao Buddhism in An Giang
Hoa Hao Buddhism (called Hoa Hao Buddhism because this religion was born in Hoa Hao, An Giang Province) is a branch of Buddhism. It was founded by Mr. Huynh Phu So in 1939.  It follows Pure Land Buddhism (The Buddhists following this Buddhism repeat the name of Amitabha every day.). It lays down a policy training at home. It has about over 1,500,000 Buddhists at present. It is the religion having Buddhist number of the fourth position in Vietnam. 
The Buddhists of Hoa Hao Buddhism mainly gather in Mekong Delta, especially An Giang with about 1,000 Buddhists. An Giang has Buddhists reaching 44 per cent the population of the province.                                                              
Hoa Hao Buddhism has celebrations containing religion color. Of 15 celebrations, there 3 celebrations held most solemnly. Those are Mr.Huynh Phu So’s birthday, Hoa Hao Buddhism founding day anniversary, Mr. Huynh Phu So‘s death anniversary.
1)Mr.Huynh Phu So’s birthday:
Yearly, on 25-11 of lunar calendar, the Buddhists of Hoa Hao Buddhism everywhere, especially An Giang province, organize Mr.Huynh Phu So’s birthday. This opportunity, besides holding the day showing gratitude founding and teaching of the head of Hoa Hao Buddhism, the pagodas hold charitable activities such as offering presents to the poor and the sick.              
2) Hoa Hao Buddhism founding day anniversary:
It happens on18-5 of the lunar calendar yearly. This is the most important day of Hoa Hao Buddhism. 
On this day, Buddhists of Hoa Hao jubilantly organize in locals, especially the holy land Hoa Hao.  Thousands of Buddhists everywhere gather in the holy land with hundreds of flower cars and flower boats. Besides, locals hold special celebration greeting program. 
3) Mr. Huynh Phu So‘s death anniversary:
It happens on 25-2 of lunar calendar. The celebration aims to show the feeling of the Buddhists to the head of religion. In addition, it encourages everybody to do good things. The anniversary takes place in the friendly atmosphere.
Above is 3 main celebration of Hoa Hao Buddhism. All are chances to awake to love of human being.  





 