THE FAMOUS  PAGODAS IN HO CHI MINH CITY
Viet Nam has enough large religions in the world such as are Caodaism, Buddism, Christianism, Islam, Faoism, Confucianism. Each religion has its worship place. Following is some called pagoda well known in Ho Chi Minh City.
1.Giac Lam – The oldest pagoda in Saigon ( Former name of HCMC).
The architecture of  Giac Lam Pogoda is concidered  representative for opagodas’ architecture in South Viet Nam. It has a general surface of (?) three letter design. Inside is 98 pillars and 113 ancient statues with many different materials.
The pagoda is famous for containing many precious documents of history, culture, art, architecture, sculpture.
Giac Lam Pagoda was established in 1774. It is one of pagodas which was presented the earliest in Gia Ð?nh ( the name of Ho Chi Minh before). It was built by Buddist Ly Thuy Long, a Chinese man. 
Adress: 118 Lac Long Quan, ward 10, Tan Binh district, HCMC.
2.Vinh Nghiem Pagoda – Place having the highest tower built of stone  in Viet Nam.
Vinh Nghiem Pagoda is a big one in Saigon. Besides it has the highest tower built of stone in Vietnam. It has 7 floors with total height of l14m. It is coverd by nice patterns, motives.
The construction was started in 1964 and finished in 1971. Its name and model are the same as a pagoda in Bac Giang province, North Vietnam built in the eleventh, in Ly dynastry.
Adress: 339 Nam Ky Khoi Nghia, ward 7, district 3, HCMC.
3.Hoang Phap Pagoda – Famous for Buddhistic training courses.
Hoang Phap Pagoda is famous for attracting buddhists who come for sightseeing and attending the Buddhistic training courses.
Attendees are taught how to look after themselves, love, undergoning hard trials here. In courses, everything is cut such as phone, TV, internet,…Courses are completely free.
The courses make you forget sadness, give you good lifestyle.
Address: Tan Hiep commune, Hoc Mon district, HCMC.
4.Xa Loi – The pagoda having the highest bell tower in Vietnam. 
Xa Loi is well known with beautiful architecture and lanscape. Its bell tower is the highest in Vietnam. It is 32 m high and has 7 floors. The bell weighs 2 tons and hang on the highest floor. Its sound propagates very far.
The pagoda is built to worship “xa loi” of  the Buddha. Therefore it is called Xa Loi pagoda. It is the first pagoda to build with new architecture. The front  is used for worshiping and the back is used for teaching the reason of Buddha. It is inaugurated in 1961.
Address: 89 Ba Huyen Thanh Quan, ward 7, district 3, HC.
5.Nam Thien Nhat Tru -  One Pillar Pagoda in South Vietnam.
Besides the famous One Pillar Pagoda in Hanoi, Saigon also has a similar place. That is  “Nam Thien Nhat Tru” called normally One Pillar Pagoda in South Vietnam. It is Built by Monk Thich Tri Dung in 1958.
 “Nam Thien Nhat Tru” has model the same as “Thang Long Nhat Tru”(One Pillar Pagoda in Hanoi), but lower and smaller. Looked from the gate of three, “Nam Thien Nhat Tru stands in the middle of Long Nhan Lake with lotuses bobing on water. People feel quiet in spirit when being here. Besides, coming here you are prayed the Bodhisattva having the weight of 61 kg, molded from a precious metal.
Address: 511 Dang Van  Bi, ward Binh Tho, district Thu Duc, HCMC.
5.Van Duc – The pagoda having the highest main worship Place in Vietnam.
The main worship place of the pagoda is 43,5 high. It is the highest one in Vietnam. It took 60 builders 2  years to make. The contructure is a model of shaping art in modern architecture.
Address: 23/4 To Ngoc Van, Tan Phu ward, Thu duc district, HCMC.
6.Ngoc Hoang – The  ancient pagoda built after Chinese pagoda’s style. 
Ngoc Hoang Pagoda was built by a monk named Luu Minh. He is from Quang Dong, China and came here in the early century 20.
It is an ancient temple built after Chinese pagoda’s style with brilliant decorative motifs . It is made from bricks, tiles. Inside there are many works of art .
It has area of  2.300 m2. Its  front has a small shrine put Daharmapala statue. Triple gate has has two sinuous gragons.
The  main shrine worships the Creator and other gods.
Coming Ngoc Hoang Pagoda, we will know little about Chinese architecture and understand the credence of people coming here. And we will seem go into fairy world.
Ngoc Hoang Pagoda locates at 73, Mai Thi Luu, District 1, HCMC.

  





