HISTORY OF CHOLON IN HO CHI MINH CITY
Coming Ho Chi Minh City, are you mentioned about Cholon name? Do you know which area is called Cholon? Why is there the name “Cholon”? How does Cholon area take shape and develop? This writing will answer your questions. 
Cholon area is the common name of area consisting of District 5, District 6, District 10 and a part of District 11 Ho Chi Minh City. Here, especially District 5, has had many Chinese living for ages. Most Chinese in Cholon areQuang Dong people, and there areTrieuChau, He and Phuckien people besides.
Cholon area has many ancient pagodas, temples, markets and houses built after Chinese model. It has lots of handicraft producing houses besides and so many eating and drinking restaurants in which dishes cooked after Chinese style. This place, there are also a lot of Chinese traditional medicine storesand lantern stores. Generally, this area has character, not mixing anywhere in the city.
Cholon areawas named after a market called Cholon (Big Market).Cholonwas built in District 5 Post Office area now in 1778. 
Before that time, in 1698, in De Ngan (that afterward called Cholon area) there were the village of Chinese people who had not acknowledged allegiance to Ch’ing dynasty in China and had made their home in Vietnam. At that time, here were still paddy fields; the land was still low; the roads were narrow and in earth; there were many small irrigation canals with lots of shrimps and fish.
In 1782, when the war between Nguyen Anh and Tay Son ended, Cholon area, including Cholon, damaged heavily. After some time, Chinese from Pho Islet (Bien Hoa City now), My Tho, HaTien (This province is in Southern Vietnam) came and lived with the Chinese in Cholon before. 
In 1879, South Vietnamgovernor made the decree setting Cholon City, level-two City. At that time Cholon area had official name.
In 1880, South Vietnam governor made the decree setting Saigon-Cholon Region.
In 1882, the first railway with the length of 5 km and the width of 1 m, linking Saigon,Cholon and My Tho began working.
In 1888, two cities Saigon and Cholon divided as before.
In 1916, People started building some laterite roads in which there was Galliéni road (Tran hung Dao today).
In 1931, Saigon-Cholon Region was given name by France presidential decree.
In 1956, the name of Saigon-Cholon Region changed into Saigon Capital.
The population in Cholon before was very sparse.
In 1901, there were over 60,000 people.
In 1920, there were about 94,000 people.
In 1940, there were about 200,000 people.
Cholon has changed official name many times, but common name is still preserved.
Talking about Cholon area, we also need know about New Cholon (official name isBinhTayMarket.).
BinhTay Market is located in District 6 now. This market was built by a Chinese business whose name was Quach Dam (also called to be Thong Hiep) in 1928. Then, he offered for City authority at that time. He only asked for building some rows of town around the market and putting his statue in the middle of the market when dying. BinhTay Market had Eastern Asiaarchitectural style. People appreciated it is one of the best markets in Saigon.  
In 2015, BinhTay Market was HCMC Vestige Preserving Center recognized the vestige of architecture and art in HCMC.

