The legend of Black Lady in Tay Ninh Province
Every year tourists everywhere came to attend Black Lady Mountain Festival in Tay Ninh Province (Le hoi nui Ba Den). Who is Black Lady? There are many legends about Black Lady:
1.The first legend: 
Once upon a time, the lord of this region was Phu Nam woman named Re Deng. People reread as Den (Black).
2.The second legend:
Black Lady had real name being Ly Thi Thien Huong, the daughter of the official controlling Trang Bang District in Tay Ninh Province in Nguyen dynasty. In the village, there was a boy named Ly Si Triet who was good at literature and fighting art. One day while Thien Huong was climbing the mountain to offer Pagoda, she was arrested by robbers. At that time, Le Si Triet rushed them saving the girl. In order to pay his debt of gratitude, her mother promised to give in marriage her to Le Si Triet. Before the wedding happened, robbers had arrested and intended to rape her. Keeping loyalty, she jumped down the slit of mountains to kill herself. After having died, Ly Thien Huong became a goddess. She informed to the leader of a pagoda in a mountain to know in his dream. In the dream, Thien Huong appeared in the shape of a black girl. The monk looked for her body and brought back to bury.
3.The third legend:
The time reclaining waste land, an official controlled the foot of the mountain in Tay Ninh Province had 2 children. The son was under the name of Thach Bien. The daughter was under the name of Thach Nuong. Her common name was Denh. When she was 13 years old, a monk named Trung Van Danh came to the half way of a mountain, built a pagoda. Loving and admiring Buddism, Denh follow the monk to learn morality. Finding Denh beautiful, the son of the official was in love and intended to married her. While 2 families was preparing for the wedding, she was suddenly missing. The families looked for everywhere, found out a section of the leg and though that it belonged to Denh. People rumored that she had been killed by a tiger. The families buried the section of the leg and built a tomb for her. People reread her name being Den (Black). People named the mountain where she has been living Black Lady Mountain.

