8 the most famous traditional folk festivals in Central Vietnam
The central is sunny and rainy through a year, but is the land area with many characters that make tourists coming here once want return here again. 
The Central has both the forest and the sea. That is the reason why natural scenery here is variety. Here there are many customs and festivals relating to the forest and the sea. 
1.Sinh Village Wresting Festival:
Sinh Village (Lai An Village) is located on the right bank of Perfume River in Phu Mau Commune, Phu Vang District, Thua Thien-Hue Province.
Sinh Village Wresting Festival happens on January 9th and 10th on the Lunar calendar. Besides traditional and spirit, the festival is a sport activity encouraging health training, bravery, self-confidence, cleverness, especially the young.
2. King Mai Temple Festival at Nghe An:
Early spring days (3th-5thof the lunar new year), tourists everywhere go back to Nam Dan for
King Mai Temple Festival – The festival is organized every year to aim to memorize King Mai Hac De (the real name is Mai Thuc Loan.)
3. Lady Festival in Binh Dinh:
Lady Festival opens on January 17th on the lunar calendar.  Beside the ceremony part, there is the dragon and lion team performing part. In addition, there are festival fight art performing, tug of war, stick pushing, pot beating and seeing folk opera.
4. Fish Praying Festival in Hue:
This is the festival of people of Thai Duong Ha, Thuan An Town, Phu Vang District, Thua Thien Hue Province. The festival is held on February 12thon the Lunar calendar yearly
to respect Mr.Truong Quy Cong. Truong Quy Cong is from Thanh Hoa who had efforts teaching the poor people to fish and carry on business boats. Each 4 years, the village holds a big festival. The festival performs the operas describing the activities of fishery that show folk character of the inhabitant in the seashore.
5. Dong Da Festival in Binh Dinh:
Dong Da Festival aims to memorize Ngoc Hoi-Dong Da victory and respect great feat of the soldiers of Tay Son movement, especially Nguyen Hue (King Quang Trung). The festival happens on January 4th, 5 on the Lunar calendar at Quang Trung Museum, Phu Phong, Tay Son, Binh Dinh. Besides traditional ceremony, the festival has many folklore activities such as martial arts, Tay Son battle drum, boat racing, folk games, classical drama.
7. Dinh Thay Thiem Festival in Binh Thuan:
This festival has become cultural character of Binh Thuan for a long time. Every year, on September 14th-16th on the Lunar calendar, thousands of visitors and locals gather at historical and cultural relic Dinh Thay Thim (Thay Thim Palace) in Binh Thuan province to make a pilgrimage and attend in the festival.
At the festival, so many ancient ceremonies still conserve. In addition, there are so many folk games attracting large tourists such as classical drama, martial arts, basket shaking, shouldering fish by walking, tug of war, lion dancing, dragon dancing which make festival atmosphere extremely effervescent.   
8. Kate Festival in Ninh Thuan and Binh Thuan Area:
This is the biggest and the most joyful festival in Ninh Thuan and Binh Thuan area where there are many Cham people living. Kate Festival (Father memorizing Festival) happens at Poklong Garai Tower in Ninh Thuan or other Cham towers on July 1st on the Cham calendar (about from September 25th to October 5th on the western calendar).
On festival days, the visitors and the local people gather to go up Cham Tower to carry out the ceremony. First, ceremony masters pray in the yard. Next, they go into the tower to carry out the ceremony bathing and getting dress for King Poklong Garai (stone statue), read prayer and sing folk songs. Outdoors, Cham people perform the special traditional folk musical program.
The above is the most famous traditional folk festivals in Central Vietnam. Traveling to Central Vietnam, do not forget join those festivals.
