Tu Than dress
If Japanese wemen are froud of Kimono, Korian wemen famous for Hanbok, Indian wemen give us impression of Sari, Vietnamese wemen always go abeast with the traditional dress.
The dress has presented in Viet Nam for a long time. Since it presented, it has had many changes.
Researchers though that the first Vietnamese dress  are Giao Linh dress. Giao Linh dress is a loose dress. It is  slit two sides. It has long and large sleeves.  Its flats are long to heels.  Its collar is crossed when being worn.  If  The dress has two flaps let straight down when being worn  is called Truc Linh dress.
(Giao Linh dress on the left, Truc Linh dress on the right)
Following Truc Linh dress is Tu Than dress. It is called Tu Than because it   has four flaps. The two front flaps are crossed and let straigt down when being worn. Two bach flats are connectted to each other. Inside the dress is a short white blouse. Inside the blouse is a shield with deep color for adults, red color for young girls.
(Tu Than dress on the left)
Following Tu Than dress is Ngu than dress. It has five flats. The two front flats are connected and the two back flats are,too. Under the front flats having a small flat.  
People say that Ngu Than dress has exested since Gia Long dynasty  (1802 – 1820). At that time Ngu Than dress was usuallys called Ao Dai. The name Ao Dai has exested  since then.
(Ngu Than dress)
We can say following Ngu Than ao dai is the new time ao dai.
In the 1930s artist Cat Tuong designed Le Mur ao dai. It only has two flats: front flat and back flat. Its trunk fits well with the body of the woman. It makes the woman more atractive. Its flats are long to heels of feet, which make steps more lissom.
At the end of the year 1958 Mrs Tran Le Xuan, Ngo Dinh Nhu ‘s wife (Ngo Dinh Nhu is the man who is a government officil in south Viet Nam before 1963) designed an ao dai called Tran Le Xuan ao dai. It has the same design as Le Mur, but It doesn’t have the neck.
(Tran Le Xuan dress)
In the 1960s Dung tailor in Dakao, Saigon produced the model of ao dai called Raglan ao dai. The ao dai has sleeves patched. Buttons are put from the neck to the armit. Then they go along a side.
(Raglan dress)
Nowadays  Although the ao dai has a variety of  design, it is not off three models: Le Mur ao dai, Tran Le Xuan ao dai, Raglan ao dai.
The ao dai is worn in festivals, in wedings, in diplomacy, in tourism, in air line, in high schools, in some universities, in some offices,  .
Generally, The ao dai has exested in Viet Nam country for along time. Although there are many changes, the ao dai remains its main form. It increases the beauty of Vietnamese wemen. Wearing the ao dai they look politer and more graceful. The ao dai is the symbol of  Vietnamese wemen. It is recognized tobe the world ‘s  cultural heritage by Unesco.
