Ho Chi Minh City Airport (SGN)
After a major renovation in early 2000s, Tan Son Nhat International Airport (SGN) is currently the largest in terms of area and capacity airport in Vietnam. Along with Lien Khuong Airport (Dalat), Con Dao Airport (Con Dao), Phu Quoc Airport and several other local airports, Ho Chi Minh City Airport is under the management of Southern Airports Corporation (SAC), a state owned corporation.

Tan Son Nhat Airport

Tan Son Nhat International Terminal

Location

The airport is located in Tan Binh district, about 8km North of the city center. It takes about 15-20 minutes to get to the center of the city from the airport.

Domestic and International terminal

The domestic terminal used to be the old International terminal with 62 check-in booths. It is easy to navigate your way around, especially with only 3 domestic airlines being active.

The new international terminal was officially put to use in 2007, welcoming tourists and business travellers from all over the world. International terminals also have many modern facilities such as restaurants, convenient stores and currency exchange booths.

It takes approximately 10 minutes to get from one terminal to another so if you have a transit in Ho Chi Minh City, you will not be in any hassle.

Flights to Ho Chi Minh City Airport

It is estimated that 3 domestic and 34 international airlines serve flights to Ho Chi Minh City.

There are direct flights from major cities in Asia (Beijing, Tokyo, Seoul, Hong Kong, etc.), Europe (Helsinki, Frankfurt, Moscow, Paris, etc.), Australia (Melbourne and Sydney). Those from North America or other countries in Western Europe can easily book a connecting flight via Hong Kong, Bangkok, Tokyo or Seoul.

From Ho Chi Minh City Airport to city center

Taxis line up, with proper police regulation outside of the airport. A metered taxi ride to the city cost about US$5-7 or you can asked for a fixed rate ($4-6). Airport Taxi and Saigon Taxi are among the most popular and reliable companies. It is better that you line up to get the regulated taxi than waving one off the road to avoid scams. Check with your hotel in advance to see if pick-up can be arranged.

Local bus runs every half hour between the airport and Ben Thanh market (which is a 15 minute walk from the downtown area). Buses run between 6 a.m. and 6p.m. and ticket price is 30 cents. Though inexpensive and convenient, bus is not the best option when you have a lot of luggage.