Hanoi weather

Representing the typical weather of tropical monsoon type in Northern Vietnam, Hanoi has the hot summer with high rainfall and the dry cold winter. The city also receives a large amount of sunlight and a relatively high humidity all throughout the year. Although the weather is divided into two main seasons: rainy season (from January to September), and dry season (from October to April), thank to transition months, Hanoi still experiences all four seasons: spring, summer, autumn and winter.

Hanoi Weather January to December

Hanoi Average Temperature by Month (Vietnam Online)

SPRING

Lasting from February to April, Hanoi’s spring is humid and wet with drizzles. The average temperature normally ranges from 15 to 20 Celcius degree. As this kind of weather is suitable for the plants to grow and flowers to blossom, spring will be the best time for tourists to witness the vitality of tropical nature. Spring is also the time for Tet holiday- the most essential and longest Vietnamese festival of the year.



More: Hanoi Weather in February, Hanoi in March, Hanoi in April

SUMMER

Hanoi’s summer is very hot with the average temperature of 32 degree (and has risen up in recent years), lasting from May to August (July is the hottest month). Since global warming has become a more and more serious problem, some summers are dry while others may be extremely wet with high humidity. Heavy rain is one feature of Hanoi’s summer, so don’t forget to bring a raincoat or an umbrella with you whenever leaving home. Moreover, be ready to be sweat under the sun during the day and a thunderstorm in the afternoon or evening!



More: Hanoi weather in May, Hanoi weather in June, Hanoi weather in July, Hanoi weather in August

FALL

Fall is considered the most beautiful and romantic time for travellers to visit Hanoi. This season is quite short, typically from middle of September to the end of November. With the average temperature is 25 degree, Hanoi’s autumn is charming with warm sunlight, cool breeze and dry atmosphere. If you love seeing the leaves change color, enjoying some local autumn specialties such as young green rice, living slowly for a to appreciate the beauty of your life, you definitely should come to Hanoi in autumn. 



More: Hanoi weather in September, Hanoi weather in October, Hanoi weather in November

WINTER

The cold weather of Hanoi will start from December and may last until late February, with the average temperature of 17.2 degree. However, sometimes it may drop to below 10 degree, and the high humidity will lend a hand in making the weather bitter cold. Bring some serious warm clothes is necessary, if you do not want to get a cold when visiting a tropical country! Hanoi’s winter is also famous for many delicious street foods which can warm you up in a chilly day.