Fortnite Season 5 kicks off with golf karts, mysterious portals
Fortnite's highly anticipated Season 5 began Thursday and it allows you to take your friends for a ride in new All Terrain Karts.

Beyond the addition of the game's first real vehicle, the update -- known as Worlds Collide -- adds Rift portals that have appeared around the island. Plus there's a new horde mode and you can battle it out with an old-timey set of flintlock weapons.


Developer Epic revealed the full extent of the changes Season 5 brings in a blog post on Thursday.

Additionally, motion controls have been added to the wildly popular Nintendo Switch version -- addressing one of our few complaints about the Switch release.

There's no word on the return of Playground mode, however, which went offline as the fifth season kicked off.

fortnite-booth-e3-2018-7419
16
A tour through the Fortnite booth at E3
For more on the update and the events leading up to it, check out our FAQ for Fortnite Season 5.

If you feel like you've missed out on the Fortnite craze, you're not alone: CNET's Mark Serrels recently admitted that it made him feel like he's 120 years old.

  Taboola Sponsored Links by  YOU MAY ALSO LIKE
This Woman Reads 100 Books A Month
Sponsored by Blinkist
If you own a Computer then you have to try this Game
Sponsored by Delta Wars
10 Countries That Don’t Want You To Visit
Sponsored by Bored Articles
New Website Finds the Cheapest Flights from Duong Ton Dan
Sponsored by Trips Shop
My love of football has always placed me in a difficult position.

On one hand, there’s an environment of conflict, oppression and political injustice around the sport. On the other, there are football’s simple, scintillating pleasures. This tension — between the ugliness of the game’s culture and its aesthetic beauty — has always been acute for L.G.B.T. fans, even more so for activists from our community. And at this World Cup, where President Vladimir Putin has presided over a hugely successful global spectacle while jailing and torturing dissidents (notably the Ukrainian filmmaker Oleg Sentsov), the contradiction between the joy of football and the misery of its culture and politics has been especially sharp.

But contradictions can be combated. And in the eight years since FIFA awarded the World Cup to Mr. Putin’s Russia, L.G.B.T. activists have made great strides in their efforts to make the sport more accessible, more welcoming, more truly beautiful.