YOU'RE NOT GOING HOME! Tens of thousands of London rail commuters face being stranded for HOURS tonight as signal meltdown hits rush hour

A signal fault in Streatham, South London, caused the travel chaos which is likely to last until 7am tomorrow

TENS of thousands of commuters in London face horrendous journeys home this evening after a system-wide signalling failure led to train chaos in the capital.

People in London have been urged to avoid London Victoria station - the second busiest in the UK - if they are using Southern, Thameslink or Gatwick Express trains.

Many journeys have been cancelled and some commuters face delays of up to one hour following a "total loss of signally power" on three supplies in South London.

The network was brought a half after the fault in Streatham and the cancellations have sparked travel misery for thousands.

Southern Rail said this morning: "Passengers are advised not to travel into London this morning due to total loss of signalling power that Network Rail has experienced on 3 separate supplies in Streatham area.

"No services to Victoria and limited/busy services elsewhere."

It advised commuters to use "alternative routes if/where possible" adding that some Thameslink trains will make it to London Bridge.

More than 200,000 commuters travel through London Victoria daily — while Southern Rail transports 620,000 people a day.

Kevin Liffey, 54, from East Finchley, London, was furious after he missed his sister's funeral in Jersey.

He couldn't get to Gatwick Airport in time despite forking out £90 on cab from Victoria.

Kevin told the BBC: "It just shows we cannot rely on public transport at the most basic level. It's just not really acceptable in a country that's as developed as it is."

Passenger GJ wrote on Twitter: "My firm are refusing to give me any more 'southern rail bank holidays' as there have been too many this year!".

Frustrated commuter Lauren Verrier added: "Another day, another signalling fault".

Network Rail offered a "sincere apology" to customers and said it was working to fix the problem but disruption is expected to last until at least the end of today.

Rail replacement busses are running on the blocked routes but passengers were  warned they will be very busy.

Thameslink services between Luton and Wimbledon were also affected and were been suspended until further notice.

It appeared that Southeastern trains were not impacted by the faults.

The signal failure at Streatham Common occurred at around 10:30pm last night, Network Rail said — with engineers frantically working overnight to try to fix it.

A power supply problem is believed to be behind the fault, they added.

Southern said passengers are entitled to refunds and compensation under the Delay Repay scheme.

A Network Rail spokesman said: “You are strongly advised not to travel via London Victoria this morning.

“Major disruption can be expected to Gatwick Express and Southern journeys to and from London Victoria, as well as Thameslink services through Streatham, with delays of up to 60 minutes, alterations and cancellations to journeys expected.

“This incident also affects Thameslink services between Luton and Wimbledon which have been suspended until further notice.”

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6700679/victoria-station-london-rail-trains-delays-southern-latest/