Be your best self with this exclusive deal on a custom suit

Heads up: The MashStash team writes about stuff you'll probably want to buy. If you do purchase something through MashStash, Mashable might earn some cash through an affiliate commission.

Your office may be business casual, but putting on a suit makes a powerful statement—and it might actually make you better at your job. 

Allow us to suggest Indochino, custom suit purveyors who make suit shopping as painless as possible. Indochino is offering an exclusive Mashable deal on custom suits, so you can look good and be great:

Dress for success
So how does dressing for success translate to actual success? According to a study in the Journal of Experimental Social Psychology that explores “enclothed cognition,” what you wear can have a serious effect on how you view yourself and how you perform at work. Dressing in ways that suggest authority—a doctor donning a white lab coat, for instance—can raise testosterone levels, a hormone that boosts self-esteem and actually makes you feel more confident. 

The phrase “dress for success” is familiar for a reason, and it’s because generations of men knew the confidence-boosting power of a bespoke suit long before modern psychologists had a name for it. Unfortunately, finding an affordable, custom-made suit can feel like searching for a tie bar in a haystack.

Bespoke suiting made simple

Indochino, one of the world’s largest made-to-measure menswear companies, makes bespoke suiting simple, stylish, and budget-friendly. No more combing through department store racks of boxy, outdated suits in various shades of mushroom.

Indochino allows you to create your own suit from scratch, either online or by visiting a showroom. Choose first from a long list of premium fabrics, from wool to linen and back again, in a variety of colors. Then, personalize your lapel, lining, monogram, pockets—a host of customizable options gives your suit your own signature touch. 

After you’re done designing, simply send over your measurements, and three weeks later, your new suit will arrive at your doorstep. If the fit isn't perfect, you can bring it to an Indochino showroom, where the alterations will be made free of charge. If you're not near a city with a showroom, you can bring the suit to your own tailor and Indochino will refund you up to $75. 

Use the exclusive Mashable code to get your own custom suit—and leave the hoodie at home. 
