The reluctant world leader: Disgruntled Trump shares stage with global 'allies'    


It was the classic family portrait in more ways than one. World leaders gritted their teeth, fixed their smiles and covered up the obvious divisions as they gathered for a fractious G7 summit. And it was all done in less than 20 seconds.

As they assembled, Donald Trump walked straight past Theresa May and Angela Merkel without even acknowledging them. On his face was an expression well known to viewers of The Apprentice, his reality television show. Mouth turned down, eyes narrow and glaring. He does it when displeased, or about to fire someone.

It is easy to see why Mr Trump resembled a bear with a sore head in La Malbaie, a sleepy town in Quebec, Canada. This was not a trip to fill him with joy.

Before he even got there two allies - Emmanuel Macron of France and Justin Trudeau of Canada - had ganged up to harangue him at a press conference over trade tariffs, the Iran deal, climate change, and just about anything else they could think of.

As he set off from Washington the US president fired off a broadside on the White House lawn, suggesting Russia should be allowed to rejoin the G7. The Kremlin could hardly have said worse about him than the French and Canadians, he reasoned. Mr Trump then made sure to arrive over an hour late.

His first act in La Malbaie was to postpone a bilateral meeting with Mr Macron. Instead, his initial encounter was with Mr Trudeau. As they met outside on the banks of the St Lawrence River Mr Trump looked glum, a slight grimace on his face.

Their handshake was lackluster. It was not the double-fisted grab Mr Trump reserves for enthusiastic greetings. No arm pumping, and no friendly hand patting.

Instead, Mr Trudeau got the "clasp and yank". This involves Mr Trump gripping a person's hand and pulling them towards him, then holding their shoulder like a vice. Body language experts interpret it as an assertion of dominance.

Mr Trudeau, in a vibrant blue suit, looked a little nervous as he extricated himself and attempted to make small talk. Mr Trump, for his part, seemed more interested in what Mrs Trudeau had to say.

Later, Mr Trump did make time for a chat with Mr Macron, sitting with on a beige sofa against a wall. Between them was a curious objet d'art comprising of a large rock and two dagger-like protusions. One of the dagger points hovered not far from Mr Macron's head. Mr Trump talked while Mr Macron listened, his hand twitching occasionally.


The venue for the summit was the Fairmont Le Manoir Richelieu hotel, an imposing casino resort designed in the style of a French castle, perched amid pines with a spectacular view of the river where Beluga whales are sometimes spotted.

It also sits at the centre of a 34-mile wide crater formed when an asteroid hit the Earth 340 million years ago, a poor omen if ever there was one. As the leaders headed to a small white dais outside for the group photo clouds loomed on the horizon.

Mr Trump hung back with Giuseppe Conte, the Italian prime minster, the only leader to initially express support for his call to readmit Russia to the club. They chatted amiably but, as he reached the other waiting leaders lining up for the photo, Mr Trump adopted his Apprentice face again. Little was said as photographs were taken.

On the short walk back to the hotel Mrs May pointed out the view to Donald Tusk, president of the European Council. Mr Trudeau, the host, pointed at his watch. Several other leaders looked at theirs. It was time to get back to business.

But then something unexpected happened. Deftly, Mrs Merkel persuaded Mr Trump to lag behind. She talked and gestured to him. He listened and nodded, asking her to go on, and nodding again. As they moved inside to sit at a round table, Mr Trump took a seat between Mrs Merkel and Mr Trudeau.

He caught the eye of Doug Mills, a photographer for the New York Times. Mr Trump, who has been highly critical of the newspaper's political coverage, pointed out Mills. "He's the number one photographer in the world," the US president said. "Unfortunately, he works for the New York Times..."

Mrs Merkel and Mr Trudeau laughed. Mr Trump's scowl slipped and he smiled. It seemed a rapprochement of sorts.