Acting US Environmental Chief to Continue Deregulation
The acting head of the Environmental Protection Agency plans to keep cutting anti-pollution rules and regulations on industry.

Andrew Wheeler held his first meeting with EPA employees Wednesday after taking over the job for Scott Pruitt, who resigned last week amid allegations of ethics violations.

Wheeler, like Pruitt and President Donald Trump, believes the nation's air and water can still be protected without what they say are job-killing regulations and pollution standards on industry.

Wheeler said the EPA would make cleaning up Superfund industrial waste sites and investing in water infrastructure priorities.

He promised to listen to all voices within the agency. "I value your input and your feedback, and you will find me and my team ready to listen," Wheeler told staffers.

Wheeler also said he was proud of his work as a coal industry lobbyist — something that has attracted criticism from environmentalists and some Democrats. He said some people use the term "coal lobbyist" in a derogatory manner, but that he had nothing to be ashamed of.

Wheeler's lobbying efforts primarily focused on better health care, pensions and benefits for retired coal miners.

Trump will nominate a new EPA chief in the coming months, and that person must meet Senate approval. Wheeler has said he is not interested in the job permanently.
President Donald Trump’s former national security adviser H.R. McMaster has signed a book deal.

Battlegrounds will cover the retired lieutenant general’s 34-year military career and his time in the Trump administration.

The book is expected to be released in 2020, when Trump is expected to run for a second term in office.

McMaster had a tumultuous one year on Trump’s staff. He was picked to replace Michael Flynn, who was forced to resign after it was revealed that he'd lied about his dealings with Russian ambassador Sergey Kislyak.

McMaster resigned in March and was replaced by John Bolton.

The book is expected to take a harsher view of the administration than books by former Trump staffers Sean Spicer and Anthony Scaramucci.

Publisher Harper Collins released a statement by McMaster in which he said he was “looking forward to researching and writing about the greatest challenges to the free world and how we can work together with like-minded nations to seize opportunities, defeat threats to security and preserve our way of life.”

Battlegrounds will be the second book by McMaster, who in 1997 wrote Dereliction of Duty: Lyndon Johnson, Robert McNamara, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Lies that Led to Vietnam.