Artists Wanted - Help Fanboy
2000-09-27 12:44 UTC-8
C.B. Cebulski of Fanboy Inc. posted a message on the Fanboy message board on Monday stating that Fanboy is looking to hire 1 female shojou style penciler 
and 2 inkers.

Entire Post:

Hello, all.

No, that headline is not a joke. Yes, Fanboy is looking for artists. We need your help with a few upcoming projects. 
The guidelines are rather specific though so before you pack up a submission and send it off to us, be sure you can meet the criteria we are looking for.

We need one female penciler with a shojo manga influenced style. We also need two inkers who will ink over already penciled comic pages. 
No previous professional experience neccessary. You need not have been published. We are looking for hardworking new talent committed to giving their 
all to bring a few exciting comic projects to fruition which Fanboy will be publishing in 2001! Sound good? Ready to work?

As far as submissions are concerned, we want to see what you've got. All artwork has to be SNAIL MAILED to us. WE WILL NOT ACCEPT INTERNET SUBMISSIONS 
VIA E-MAIL! ANY WE GET WILL SIMPLY BE DELETED AND NOT EVEN CONSIDERED!

Pencilers: We need to see 6 to 8 pages of sequential art. They must clearly demonstrate your layout and storytelling ability. We are looking for a 
subtle yet kinetic style. We do not want just sketches or pin-ups, although you may feel free to include them. We need fully penciled pages that show 
you understand pacing and panel-to-panel transition. The pages must tell a complete story. Including the script you work from would also be helpful so 
we can see how you translate the written page into the visual medium. Please send only photocopies. NO ORIGINALS. We will not return any artwork as it will go on file.

Inkers: Please feel free to send us whatever you like that you feel best demonstrates your skill in capturing the line work of the original penciler.
We will need copies of the original penciled work in addition to your inks of the same pages. We would like to see actual inked comic pages as well as 
covers and pin-up art. Please send only photocopies. NO ORIGINALS. We will not return any artwork as it will go on file.

Be sure to include your name., address, phone number, best time to call and e-mail addresss with your submissions. If you have a webpage with addtional 
art we can check out, be sure to include that address as well. Also, please write your name. and e-mail address on each page you send as they tend to get 
separted sometimes.

Please send all samples by United States Postal Service. However, you need not use Priority Mail or Express Mail. PLEASE do not send us any samples by UPS, 
FedEx, Airborne or other express carrier. Just Because! we get your work earlier does not mean we look at it any faster or give it any kind of preferential treatment.

Also, if we think you have the skills we are looking for, we will contact you. Please do not send constant follow-up e-mails asking if we've seen your work. 
We'll call you.

We are sorry but we are not looking at any writing samples or story submissions at this time.

Please feel free to e-mail me with any questions at cbcebulski@fanboyinc.com. Also, please feel free to spread the word if you know anyone who you think 
could fit the bill.

Thanks for your cooperation. I really look forward to seeing what you've got.

Read manga,
C.B. Cebulski
