A onetime enemy set for a warm White House welcome

By James Borton and Sandra Erwin - Special to The Washington Times - Tuesday, May 30, 2017

Nations can’t choose their neighbors, but Vietnam, a country long buffeted by war, is proving it can certainly choose its friends.

President Trump on Wednesday will greet Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc at the White House, the clearest sign to date that Washington and Hanoi, once-implacable foes burdened by a bloody and tragic history, increasingly share overlapping strategic interests and a mutual outlook on the region and the world.

It’s a measure of how far the two countries have come — and how large Vietnam looms in the emerging Trump administration strategy for Asia — that Mr. Phuc will be the first Southeast Asian leader to visit the White House since Mr. Trump’s election.

The arrival of Vietnam’s delegation of more than 100 diplomats and business leaders bolsters hopes that Mr. Trump will make the trip in November to attend the APEC Summit that Vietnam is hosting in Da Nang. As a sign of expanding business interests between the two countries, the Washington-based U.S.-ASEAN Business Council is hosting a formal dinner reception.

“If the two countries enter a mutually beneficial free trade agreement that was recently suggested by many American firms doing business in Vietnam, such an agreement will reflect the growing trend and vast potential of our economies and help create more jobs for Americans and Vietnamese alike,” said Tran Tuan, Minister of Industry and Trade.

While Vietnam was disappointed when Mr. Trump torpedoed the Trans-Pacific Partnership, it is eager to know what the new administration plans for economy and trade under its “America First” approach. Mr. Phuc hopes to limit the fallout from the TPP’s collapse by offering to negotiate a bilateral trade agreement with Washington.

“They also want to get a reading on how the Trump administration plans to engage the region economically after the president canceled the TPP, in which Vietnam would have been a major beneficiary,” said Murray Hiebert, a senior adviser and Southeast Asia director at the D.C.-based Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS).

Both nations have a common interest in containing China’s island-building activities, and U.S. defense officials regard Vietnam as a key partner in efforts to patrol contested waters. Just last week, the Trump administration agreed to give Vietnam’s coast guard six U.S.-made coastal patrol boats.

Since Washington lifted the arms embargo last year, Vietnam has been in talks with Western and U.S. arms manufacturers about its need to boost the country’s fleet of fighter jets, helicopters and maritime patrol aircraft. Analysts say this regional security cooperation in the South China Sea now includes joint naval exercises, and U.S. Navy and Coast Guard vessels have been allowed to dock for repairs and maintenance in Cam Ranh Bay, a former American deepwater port during the Vietnam War.

A tighter security alliance with the United States is also a top goal of Mr. Phuc’s visit, said Michael Green, who served on the National Security Council during the George W. Bush administration and was in the White House in 2005 when Vietnam’s then-prime minister made a historic first-ever visit to Washington since the war.

Mr. Green, who is now vice president of the CSIS, predicted that Mr. Phuc would seek to forge an alliance with Mr. Trump similar to the one the new president has formed with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.

“I know they want to lock in the kind of relationship that Abe did,” said Mr. Green. “Vietnam is not a country that wants to distance itself from the United States because Donald Trump is president.”
