Tyson Fury wants bigger opponent for his next fight after easy return to the ring 

Tyson Fury wants Frank Warren, his promoter, to find a “bigger opponent” for his next fight in Belfast on Aug 18 after a facile victory against the outclassed Sefer Seferi in the former world No?1’s comeback fight after a 31-month absence. Seferi, 39, quit on his stool after four rounds, with Fury showboating his way through the first two rounds before landing heavy shots in the fourth.

Fellow British heavyweight Tony Bellew acted with alacrity to put himself forward as an opponent, with Warren saying on Sunday that Fury-Bellew could take place “by the end of the year”.

The takeaway from the return of Fury, regardless of his joy at being back, is that he remains a long way from being close to challenging at elite level again and will need to increase his focus and the level of opponent as he progresses. But it was a triumph of sorts for the fighter in shedding seven stone, and just getting himself back into the ring, after a high-profile battle with depression.

Critics of the fight accused the contest as being cynical matchmaking, the 6ft 9in, 19st 10lb Fury facing an opponent who was a foot shorter and five stones lighter. But even Fury himself expects tougher, taller opposition next time out, on the undercard of Carl Frampton’s next outing at Windsor Park.

“I want someone big, not small ones,” said Fury. “Look at Deontay Wilder and Anthony Joshua, they’re big guys. I’ve got to prepare for people like that.

“I had a little dance under the lights. It was a bit of a loosener back. A couple more fights and I will be ready. If I am brutally honest, I could have done him in the first 10 seconds. But what good would that have done me?”

Though Fury insisted afterwards that he will “have a world title by the end of the year, no problem” there is a long way to go yet to rediscover the form he showed in November 2015 when he skilfully dethroned Wladimir Klitschko.

Bellew, ranked No?6 by the World Boxing Council after his back-to-back victories over David Haye, was quick to respond. “I’d knock Fury out,” tweeted Bellew after witnessing events unfold in Manchester.

Warren responded on Sunday that Fury’s “third or fourth fight could be for a title”. The promoter added: “We’d go for Tony Bellew before the end of the year.” That may be so, and although Fury is fit and fighting again, he is not yet fighting fit, and it may take a series of bouts before Fury is truly ready to meet the likes of Joshua or Wilder in a world-title contest.

Look back in history, and George Foreman and Muhammad Ali make an interesting study. Foreman retired in 1977 and returned in 1987. It took him 30 fights and seven years to become the heavyweight champion again when he knocked out Michael Moorer. He was 45. He also fought 10 times in his first year back. Ali, out of boxing for three years and seven months, took 18 fights over a four-year period before he beat Foreman in Zaire to reclaim the world crown.

As Warren rightly added: “Joshua and Wilder will be out of action for a while, so Fury’s just ticking along. We’ll step up. It is all about getting the rust out of his system.”

Also on the Manchester bill, Terry Flanagan lost a split decision to American Maurice Hooker in a bid to become a two-weight world champion with the vacant World Boxing Organisation super lightweight title on the line. Mancunian Flanagan fell to his first defeat in his 34th fight as the judges returned a set of bizarre scores – 115-113 and 117-111 for the Dallas fighter and 117-111 for Flanagan, who vowed to come back stronger.

