EYE SPY Smart TVs are watching YOU – here’s how your telly gives away your viewing habits
You probably didn't realise that your fancy new television was spying on EVERYTHING you watch
MOST of us spend hours watching our smart TVs – but few realise that those same televisions are watching you right back.
A new report reveals how smart TVs are snooping on everything you view, and profiting off the info they collect.
The New York Times has published an investigation into a company called Samba TV that hoovers up data about your viewing habits.
Samba TV has deals with top telly makers around the world, including Sony, Sharp, TCL and Philips.
Those deals put snooping software on your TVs, which can recognise exactly what you're watching.
The software then uses this info to serve advertisements to you – even on other devices, like your smartphone
When you buy a new TV from one of these companies, you'll be prompted to accept Samba TV during setup.
It promises to recommend shows to you by "cleverly recognising onscreen content".
But critics have complained that there's not enough detail about how this works – or what it means for users.
According to one Samba TV exec, more than 90% of people had opted into the feature.
Samba TV works by tracking everything that appears on your screen on a second-by-second basis.
It reads the pixels of the image you're seeing to identify what shows you're watching, and even which advertisements are playing.
This includes content from app-style services like Netflix and HBO, as well as video games played through consoles.
But it gets even more invasive: Samba TV can identify other devices in your home that share the TV's internet connection.
So how does Samba TV make money? It doesn't actually sell your data straight to advertisers.
Instead, advertisers will pay Samba TV to direct their ads to gadget's in people's homes.
Samba TV will use your viewing habits to target ads after a company's TV advertisement has played, or perhaps when a rival company's ad airs.
The snooping firm can also work out if a person has visited an advertiser's site after watching one of their TV ads.
According to Ofcom, around 40% of British homes now have a smart TV.
Typically when customers buy a TV, they're excited to get it set up and start watching telly – and may rush through opt-in menus.
Samba TV's own opt-in request reads: "Interact with your favorite shows. Get recommendations based on the content you love.
"Connect your devices for exclusive content and special offers. By cleverly recognizing onscreen content, Samba Interactive TV lets you engage with your TV in a whole new way."