How to be an intrepid traveller
Your next adventure awaits
By Mashable Brand X

Advertising Feature with Intrepid Travel

Airport people-watching is one of your favourite hobbies. “Stable in every way but geographically” is the zinger on your dating app profile. You’ve spent more hours than you care to admit perusing Google Earth while procrastinating work deadlines — and the sheer size of the some of the world’s countries never fails to amaze you. (Seriously, can we talk about how massive Mongolia is?)

If the above statements resonate with you, you may be an intrepid traveller.

But what does it really mean to be intrepid? It’s about so much more than simply checking countries off your bucket list. Check out the video below to learn more, and read on to find out how you can make intrepid a part of your travel vernacular.

As with just about any topic that has its own dedicated subreddit, there are heaps of opinions about where, when, and how often one “should” travel.

But intrepid travellers know that there’s no right or wrong way to explore the world — they know that all the “shoulds” are subjective. These types of travellers are bold, curious, and they consider themselves part of a vanguard. They seek out adventure for adventure’s sake. 

Intrepid travellers also understand that all the clichés associated with travel-as-a-vehicle-for-self-discovery are — well, they’re all true. But they also know that these journeys are about way more than a social media hashtag or a laptop sticker of a Mark Twain quote. They’re about seeing the world through a new lens, and turning that lens inward — and constantly seeking out new avenues for personal growth.

For you, maybe being intrepid means strolling through a Sunday market as the only foreign face in a sea of locals, sampling strange-looking, foul-smelling fruits (which, as it turns out, are delightful). Maybe it means learning how to navigate the beautifully chaotic motorbike traffic in Southeast Asia. Maybe it means taking your first yoga class in a place where you don’t speak a word of the language (even though you’ve never even been able to touch your toes).

Being intrepid may mean ditching the concrete jungle to take in the natural splendor of Patagonia, eschewing air con to get a glimpse of silverback gorillas in the wild in Uganda, or swapping the daily commute for a hike through the foothills of the world’s highest mountains in Nepal. (Pssst: By the way, you can take all of these trips with Intrepid Travel, a company that specialises in adventurous itineraries for small groups and solo travellers.) 

Whatever it means to you, intrepid travel is about awakening your senses, widening your worldview, and expanding your horizons in a way that’s only possible when you venture far beyond your comfortable cultural cocoon. So go ahead: Sample the durian. Rent that motorbike. Try your first-ever handstand. You won’t regret it.

Intrepid travellers know that learning about local cultures involves more than making small talk with taxi drivers or mastering the art of haggling with street vendors (although it certainly involves those things, too). 

Your next grand adventure awaits. Check out Intrepid Travel today to start planning it — and while you’re there, read about other like-minded adventurers’ journeys to some of the most awe-inspiring destinations in the world.
