Hillary Clinton trolls Jim Comey, who used Gmail for work, with three little words: 'But my emails...'


Hillary Clinton distilled two years worth of hurt into a simple, biting tweet on Thursday evening as she responded to news that James Comey, whose pursuit of her personal email use she believes cost her the 2016 election, had conducted official business on a Gmail account.

“But my emails,” she said.

The pithy remark sent her supporters into raptures on social media as they pointed out the irony. And they repeated accusations that the former FBI director sabotaged her presidential campaign by publicly re-opening his investigation shortly before the election.

Hours earlier, the Justice Department’s inspector general released his report, accusing Mr Comey of errors of judgement in his handling of Mrs Clinton’s email investigation – although clearing him of any suggestion of bias.

Michael Horowitz also detailed “numerous instances” when the FBI director used his personal email for conducting official business. The practice was “inconsistent” with departmental policy, he said.

And, in another bitter irony, his report noted that Mr Comey himself had warned staff at an FBI conference in October 2016 they would face “huge trouble” if they used private email services as Mrs Clinton had done.

“You can’t make this stuff up,” said Kevin Mitnick on Twitter.

“Another day, another slay,” said a supportive account, after Mrs Clinton’s riposte.

The key part of the report concludes that the FBI director, who announced in July 2016 that Mrs Clinton had been "extremely careless" with classified material but would not be charged with any crime, repeatedly departed from normal Justice Department protocol.

He further announced in October of that year - 11 days before the election that he was reopening the investigation, even though the FBI does not usually comment publicly on investigations. It proved to be the investigation that refused to die.

Mr Trump narrowly won the election and dismissed Mr Comey months later, as the FBI director investigated allegations of Russian meddling. 

Since then the former FBI director has published a memoir and emerged as one of Mr Trump's greatest critics.