Korean Food Under a Japanese Influence, at the Bari
By Florence Fabricant
May 8, 2018

Headliner
THE BARI Many newer Korean restaurants in New York seem determined to break from stereotypes, and from Manhattan’s Koreatown, where business travelers just in from Seoul can fuel up and grill steaks at the table. Chefs whose training may have come in French, Japanese or American restaurants are often behind the stove, adding innovation to the repertory. (See Pete Wells’s review this week of Soogil, in the East Village.) The Bari, in NoHo, blends Korean and Japanese influences. Its specialty is food in bowls (bari means bowl), with a separate section on the menu listing seven, including bluefin tuna poke, udon noodles, uni bibimbap and a rice and farro “risotto.” Other dishes include an avocado salad with snow crab, and gochujang ribs with miso. At the sushi bar, a $65 omakase includes more than a dozen pieces. The restaurant is the work of Danny Hahn, who has managed restaurants but never owned one before. His chef and partner, Mason Rhee, has cooked at several Korean and Korean-fusion places: 417 Lafayette Street (East Fourth Street), 646-869-0383, thebarinyc.com.

Opening
BROKEN SHAKER The bar, created by Gabriel Orta and Elad Zvi, has already been established in Miami, Chicago and Los Angeles. Now, in collaboration with the owner of the Freehand hotels, the Sydell Group, it has set up shop on the roof of the Freehand New York, a new hotel where the various eating and drinking components are gradually arriving. At this Caribbean-style indoor-outdoor setting with 360-degree views and lush greenery, specialty drinks include a preserved lime caipirinha, a strawberry “rye tai” made with Wild Turkey 101 rye, and a bagel fizz starring gin, aquavit and powdered cream cheese. Bar food includes arepas, a chicken schnitzel sandwich and shrimp escabeche (Wednesday): 23 Lexington Avenue (23rd Street), freehandhotels.com.

ZERO WASTE BISTRO A couple of months ago, a restaurant called Nolla, meaning zero, opened in Helsinki. Its mission is to produce as little waste as possible by using carrot tops, fruit peelings and the like. Now, with the support of the Finnish Cultural Institute in New York, the Nolla chefs Luka Balac, Carlos Henriques and Albert Franch Sunyer are coming to New York to run a pop-up restaurant from May 19 through 22. It will serve lunch and brunch in a space that is part of the “WantedDesign” exhibit in a former warehouse in Chelsea. During the run of the pop-up, there will also be discussions and cooking workshops. Tickets for meals are $52 and go on sale Tuesday afternoon: 269 11th Avenue (27th Street), fciny.org.

RUUMY’S TAVERN When this Hell’s Kitchen restaurant opened in frigid weather several weeks ago, its garden was irrelevant. But finally, the 25 outdoor seats are a draw. Like the rest of the two-level restaurant, the garden is decorated with vintage touches — a setting for American food that sticks to comfort, not adventure, with mac and cheese, matzo ball soup, assorted flatbreads and chicken potpie. The chef, Matthew Sadownick, worked at Gramercy Tavern and Union Square Cafe: 310 West 53rd Street, 917-409-3661, ruumystavern.com.

WOODPECKER BY DAVID BURKE Mr. Burke has become the Energizer Bunny of the restaurant world. Hardly a week goes by without an announcement of some new venture for the chef and restaurateur. He is the culinary director and managing partner at this latest spot, where wood-oven cooking produces spatchcocked chicken, pork prime rib and whole branzino. There are several pizzas, and some of his signatures, like clothesline bacon. (Monday): 1216 Broadway (30th Street), 646-398-7664, woodpeckerbydb.com.

GILLIGAN’S A beachy new outdoor oasis in SoHo is dishing up lobster rolls, shrimp spaghettini and white clam pizza, to be washed down with frozen watermelon margaritas: Soho Grand Hotel, 310 West Broadway, 212-965-3271, gilligansnyc.com.

MOTHERDOUGH These days, if your pizza dough doesn’t take a full two days to rise, you may as well shut your doors. And you must use imported Italian flour (though locally raised and milled grain might do). These precepts guide Elisa Rizzi, who studied the art of pizza in her native Italy before landing in New York in 2015 with 10-year-old starter in her suitcase. She has opened her own pizzeria, serving nine varieties baked on whole-wheat or barley crusts: 72 Seventh Avenue (Berkeley Place), Park Slope, Brooklyn, 929-295-0012, motherdough.pizza.

THE SHAKE AND BURGER BAR The gaudy, wild milkshakes (Junior’s Cheesecake Raspberry, Cinnamon Toast Crunch) and burgers ground from a blend of cuts are not what set this new place apart. The buns are the draw. Some are made with activated charcoal, so they’re black. (They’re not the first with black burger buns; Juanchi’s in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and Miami has been baking black brioche buns for many years.): 344 Third Avenue (26th Street), 646-918-7220, theshakeandburgerbar.com.

THE HOT DIGGITY Students at the Food and Finance High School have engineered a fund-raising pop-up for scholarships next week. Hot dogs and vegetable dogs will be served from 3 to 5 p.m. May 14 through 16 and until 8 p.m. May 17. There will be also be pretzel buns, cookies, shaved ice made by the students, and cold brew from Joe Coffee. Sir Kensington’s, a boutique condiment brand, is donating ketchup and so forth, and will match the money raised: Food and Finance High School, 525 West 50th Street, foodfinancehs.org.

SQUEAKCITY Melissa Elders, who founded the dining club Nibble & squeak — which runs events that allow people to attend with youngsters, even babies — has created a new restaurant directory with that audience in mind. Available for 10 cities with more to come, it includes professional and reader reviews, neighborhood guides and availability of kid-friendly features like high chairs and children’s menus: Squeakcity.com, starting May 8.

MAKE MY CAKE This Harlem-based bakery, known for its red velvet and other cakes, cupcakes, pies and cheesecakes, has moved its 116th Street bakery to Columbus Avenue. Its shop at 2380 Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard (139th Street) remains open: 795 Columbus Avenue (100th Street), 212-280-2253, makemycake.com.

Chef on the Move
ANGELA DIMAYUGA, the former executive chef at Mission Chinese Food, has been appointed the creative director for food and culture at the Standard hotels.