'THAT'S NOT BREXIT' Jacob Rees-Mogg blasts Theresa May’s new customs plan saying it is ‘hard to think of a worse idea’

Brexiteers have slammed the Prime Minister’s ‘third way’ compromise as a ‘fiction to keep us in the EU’ - while Mr Rees-Mogg says close alignment with Brussels’ rules would be ‘essentially tearing up the manifesto’

THERESA May's new customs plan has been blasted by Jacob Rees-Mogg who said it is “hard to think of a worse idea”.

The leading Eurosceptic slammed the Prime Minister’s proposed ‘third way’ compromise to break the deadlock in the negotiations – which has been labelled a “fiction to keep us in the EU”.

Speaking to the BBC, Mr Rees-Mogg said: “That’s not Brexit.

“It’s very important that we are not in regulatory alignment even if we have similar regulations.

“Because we will need to do trade deals with other countries - if we insist on regulatory alignment we have nothing to offer them on trade deals.”

He led a cabal of Brexiteer MPs into a showdown meeting with Mrs May’s Chief Whip this morning, after they raised fears her new plan to break the deadlock in talks will deliver an even softer Brexit.

Asked on the Daily Politics about the new proposal, Mr Rees-Mogg said: “I don’t think that would meet the Conservative Party manifesto and I think the British electorate would have a right to complain.

“[It would be] essentially tearing up the manifesto and keeping us a vassal state.”

Today’s row comes ahead of the PM’s attempt to agree a negotiating position with her warring Cabinet when she takes her senior ministers to Chequers for a crunch summit on Friday.

Mrs May is trying to force through a compromise that will secure support from both wings of her Cabinet at the gathering on Friday.

But critics have called for the Government to maintain its red lines on leaving the single market and customs union when we exit the bloc.

And pro-Brexit Cabinet ministers have been urged to resist any attempts to keep the UK closely tied to Brussels with the PM’s new offer.

Tory MP Andrea Jenkyns, who quit as a ministerial aide in order to speak more freely about Brexit, urged them to stand up for Leave voters and "show your steel on Friday".

In a message on Twitter aimed at Boris Johnson, Michael Gove, Penny Mordaunt, Liam Fox, Andrea Leadsom and Chris Grayling, she added: "We know some of you want to be the future party leader.”

But Mr Gove insisted a "united position" would be reached at the away day, ahead of the publication of a White Paper outlining the Government's blueprint for the future relationship with the EU next week.

And he played down speculation pro-Brexit ministers such as Foreign Secretary Mr Johnson could quit if there was perceived to be any backsliding.

After the first two proposals to overcome the problems at the Irish border and ports across the UK, Downing Street revealed a so-called “third way” had been formulated.

But there are claims it is just a rebranded version of her much-criticised “customs partnership'”, which would see Britain keep on collecting the EU’s border taxes after Brexit.

Veteran Eurosceptic Bernard Jenkin last night urged Mrs May not to revive the plan, telling the Daily Mail: “The Government would be playing into the hands of the EU.

“This deal would deliver Brexit but without any of its freedoms or advantages.”

And a Cabinet source blasted the plan, telling the Telegraph: "This doesn't work, it is a fiction designed to keep us in the EU and single market.

“It's just the customs partnership dressed up with another name."

poisoning
Another added: "Eurosceptic Cabinet ministers feel like they haven't been listened to by Downing Street.

“They are wondering what on earth all the debate has been about if they are just going to be ignored."

But Mr Gove insisted the Government’s red lines would remain intact, telling the BBC: "The Prime Minister has a clear plan which will ensure that Britain can leave the EU, be outside the single market and customs union, maintain as frictionless access as possible to the European market and also ensure that we take back control of our laws and our borders."

Asked about the possibility of people quitting as ministers after Friday's showdown, he said: "The only departures that I think we will see are more departures from Heathrow when a third runway is built."

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6693200/theresa-may-faces-showdown-with-brexiteers-after-fury-over-her-third-way-customs-compromise-labelled-fiction-to-keep-us-in-eu/