New Press Release shed's more light on upcoming Akira release
2001-01-29 21:23 UTC-8
Excerpts from Press release:

Film Will Debut Theatrically Spring 2001

LONG BEACH, Calif., Jan. 29 /PRNewswire/ -- Utilizing the latest high-definition digital technology, Pioneer Entertainment has retained International Video Conversions, 
Inc. (IVC) to restore the classic anime film ‘’Akira.'' First released in 1988 and produced by the ‘’Akira'' committee (under license by Kodansha, Tokyo, Japan), 
‘’Akira'' has garnered legions of fans around the world and is still considered the pinnacle of cel animation. To celebrate this landmark film, 
‘’Akira'' will undergo a complete restoration at a cost of one million dollars. The restoration will include a new film interpositive and high-definition 
mastering using the latest Digital Vision HD technology. In addition, ‘’Akira'' will be THX certified, the audio components will be re-mixed to Dolby Digital 
AC3 Surround Sound and a new English dub will be created from a new translation of the original Japanese script. ‘’Akira'' will be released theatrically in Spring 2001.

‘’'Akira' jump-started the anime industry with its ground-breaking animation and has achieved a cult status with anime fans around the world, 
said Pioneer Entertainmentpresident Yosuke Kobayashi. ‘’Restoring this extraordinary film will enable Pioneer Entertainment to re-introduce 'Akira' to a new 
generation and seal its place as the benchmark anime film.''

‘’'Akira' is dramatic cel animation at its best, making use of vibrant color, high and low contrast, fine detail and an extreme range of light and dark scenes, 
said Mark Nakamine, IVC's high definition colorist. ‘’I used the very latest in high definition processing to create the digital master which will convey 
all the visual nuances intended.''

Neo-Tokyo has risen from the ashes of World War III to become a dark and dangerous megalopolis infested with gangs and terrorists. 
The government seethes with corruption and only maintains a token control over the powerful military that prevents total chaos and hides the secrets of the past.

Childhood friends Tetsuo and Kaneda plunge into Neo-Tokyo's darkest secret when their motorcycle gang encounters a military operation to retrieve an escaped 
experimental subject. Tetsuo, captured by the military, is subjected to experiments that make him a powerful psychic, but unfortunately for Neo-Tokyo, 
Testuo's powers rage out of control and he lashes out at the world that has oppressed him. Nothing can stop the destructive forces that Tetsuo wields except 
possibly the last boy to destroy Tokyo -- Akira!

International Video Conversions, Inc. (IVC) is one of the world's largest High Definition, video mastering, restoration and conversion facilities. 
IVC's clients include all of Hollywood's major studios, and the company is regarded as the leader in its field. LONG BEACH, Calif., Jan. 29 /PRNewswire/ -- 
Utilizing the latest high-definition digital technology, Pioneer Entertainment has retained International Video Conversions, Inc. (IVC) 
to restore the classic anime film ‘’Akira.'' First released in 1988 and produced by the ‘’Akira'' committee (under license by Kodansha, Tokyo, Japan), 
‘’Akira'' has garnered legions of fans around the world and is still considered the pinnacle of cel animation. To celebrate this landmark film, 
‘’Akira'' will undergo a complete restoration at a cost of one million dollars. The restoration will include a new film interpositive and high-definition 
mastering using the latest Digital Vision HD technology. In addition, ‘’Akira'' will be THX certified, the audio components will be re-xed to Dolby Digital 
AC3 Surround Sound and a new English dub will be created from a new translation of the original Japanese script. ‘’Akira'' will be released theatrically in Spring 2001.


