Avocados: Nature’s Magical Fruit
They’re delicious, and they’re nutrient-rich
Avocados are essentially nature’s magical fruit. They’re delicious, but they’re also healthy.
No matter how you consume them — and the numbers of ways to do so are many — the creamy green superfood always packs a powerful and diverse nutritional punch. Adding a nutrient-dense food like Avocados From Mexico to your daily diet can be a very beneficial way to get more of what your body needs to keep thriving.
WHAT EXACTLY DOES ‘NUTRIENT-DENSE’ MEAN?
Avocados are considered a “nutrient-dense” fruit. This sounds good, but what, exactly, does it mean?
According to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, nutrient-dense foods provide vitamins, minerals and other substances that may have positive health effects, but with relatively few calories.
Nutrient-dense foods are lean or low in solid fats, and minimize or exclude added solid fats, added sugars, and added refined starches, as these add calories but few essential nutrients or dietary fiber. They also minimize or exclude added salt or other compounds high in sodium, and come in forms that retain naturally occurring components such as dietary fiber.
So when you’re eating a food like an avocado, you’re getting high percentages of recommended daily values in many important vitamins and minerals.
THE SCIENCE INSIDE
How can we possibly know that there are so many nutrients in avocados? That there are enough for them to be actually classified as “nutrient-dense?”
This knowledge isn’t guess-work or anecdotal, and to call a food nutrient-dense isn’t something you can just say without any proof. It’s fact that comes from research and analysis. 
Avocados, like most foods, are heavily scrutinized and examined by the scientific community, in an effort to learn as much as possible about the items people are putting into their bodies. The more we know about the foods we eat, the better, healthier diets we ultimately form for ourselves and our health and fitness goals.
In the case of the avocado, the results have been positive to a somewhat surprising degree.
When scientists are measuring the nutrients found in avocados, they use things like chromatography and x-ray frequencies to identify vitamins and minerals.
What they’ve found in avocados are nearly 20 vitamins, minerals and phytonutrients per 50g serving, which is generally just one-third of a medium avocado. 
Avocados are also a good source of fiber, folate, vitamin K, pantothenic acid and copper, among other things.
You might not think of copper as something that is good for your health, but it serves to help keep your blood vessels, nerves, immune system and bones healthy.
And we know this, of course, because of scientific analysis.
THE SKINNY ON FATS
Avocados are also one of the only fruits out there that contain unsaturated fats of both the monounsaturated and polyunsaturated varieties. These, generally referred to as “good” fats, and they help your body to absorb fat-soluble nutrients without raising your LDL cholesterol, which is nicknamed “bad” cholesterol.
Fat-soluble nutrients include, to name just a few, vitamins A, D, K and E – all of which are found in 1/3 of a medium avocado (50 g). So eating an avocado not only gives you those vitamins, but the good fats in avocado serve as a sort of nutrient booster to help your body absorb the nutrients you’re consuming from whatever you’re eating an avocado with.
This means some of the healthy components that make up an avocado actually work together for maximized nutritional benefit.
Just imagine how many nutrients you’d get, for example, if you added an avocado to a smoothie packed with other nutrient-dense foods, like kale or blueberries.
Avocados are a delicious addition to your diet, and a natural way to get and benefit from more nutrients, no matter how you slice it.


   
