Tech Giants Win a Battle Over Copyright Rules in Europe
It’s a fight nearly as old as the internet.
On one side are news organizations, broadcasters and music companies who want to control how their 
content spreads across the web, and to get paid more for it. On the other are tech companies such 
as Facebook and Google, who argue that they funnel viewers and advertising revenue to media outlets, 
and free-speech advocates, who say that regulating the internet would set a dangerous precedent 
and limit access to information.
That battle flared up in Europe on Thursday. Two powerful industries faced off — technology against 
media, platforms against publishers — in an unusually aggressive lobbying campaign in the European 
Parliament over a bill that would impose some of the world’s strictest copyright laws, which would 
have required tech companies to filter out unlicensed content and pay for its use.
On this occasion, tech prevailed; the proposal was voted down.
The decision came amid broader efforts in Brussels to rein in tech giants. European regulators have 
already brought in tough new privacy rules, and are considering enhancing them. They have hit 
Silicon Valley companies with hefty antitrust fines, and are investigating them over their tax 
practices and handling of data. And like elsewhere in the world, they are increasingly skeptical 
of the argument made by internet companies that they are simply impartial platforms who cannot be 
held responsible for what is posted on their pages.
“Making content available on the internet does not come without responsibility,” said Eleonora 
Rosati, an associated professor on intellectual property law at the University of Southampton’s 
law school in England, who has been tracking the bill. “Rights holders want to control how their 
content is made available, shared and indexed.”
But after a well-coordinated campaign by companies including Facebook, Google, Reddit and Wikipedia, 
as well as by proponents of an open internet, the European Parliament on Thursday rejected the 
proposed new copyright law. Though lawmakers can still revise the bill and call another vote, the 
result is a blow to media companies who had believed that, if ever there was a good time to impose 
tougher rules on tech giants, this would be it.
Media businesses like Axel Springer of Germany have become frustrated because even as their content 
has spread online, it is platforms like YouTube, owned by Google, and Facebook that have grown into 
advertising powerhouses on the back of the material.