PARKING MAD Manchester Airport meet and greet firm force family to get £20 taxi to pick up their car ‘because it’s Eid’ – and they find it covered in MUCK

PARKING MAD Manchester Airport meet and greet firm force family to get £20 taxi to pick up their car ‘because it’s Eid’ – and they find it covered in MUCK

A FAMILY claim an airport meet and greet service told them to get a £20 taxi to pick their car up after they were left with no drivers to take them to it "because it's Eid".

Abbie Latimer, 22, who works as a mortgage adviser, said that when they finally got to their car they discovered it was covered in muck, had 200 extra miles on the clock and had been left in a residential street.

Abbie was returning to Manchester Airport from a holiday in Cancun with partner Sam, 26, and their 14-month-old son Ollie on June 14 when the firm, Holiday Park Manchester, first contacted them.

They received a text which read: "Hi, sorry for the inconvenience. Due to Eid there are no drivers available till 12pm.

"If you please make your way down to Brantingham Road, Chorlton, Manchester, just before the mini roundabout to pick your car."

The couple called the meet and greet firm explaining their son had been ill while on holiday and this was not convenient.

However they claim that a worker for the company was rude and told them: "We don't f****** care."

When they landed at Manchester Airport the family followed their instructions and got a £20 taxi to an address but could not see their car.

A vehicle then arrived at the address and drove the family 200 yards down a nearby main road to where their car was parked under a tree.

They claim they found their car left in a state, and that it had 200 miles extra on the mileage clock.

Abbie told The Sun Online: "We were waiting at Cancun airport to come home and got the text.

"It said that no one was free to come pick us up because it was Eid, so obviously we were really annoyed and called to complain.

"They were so abusive to Sam and threatening, we could not really believe it. We told them our son was ill and they just said 'we don't f****** care.

"Then finally when we got to the car they had left it under a tree and it was in a total state.

"Since then they are refusing to answer if they will give us a refund, or pay for our taxi - they just do not seem to care.

"They won't explain why we have 200 miles more on our mileage, they are just hoping we will go quiet.

"I'd never use them again. The way it ended really did make it the holiday from hell."

The Sun Online contacted the price comparison site We Deal Meet and Greet, which Abbie booked the service through.

A worker claimed Holiday Park Manchester had gone into administration while the family were on holiday, and as a result was unable to deliver its usual service.

We Deal Meet and Greet has made further attempts to get an explanation from Holiday Park Manchester but has not had a response.

As an apology We Deal Meet and Greet has refunded Abbie her £50 booking fee and for the £20 taxi.

The firm said: "The customer agreed and was happy with this resolution."

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6686262/manchester-airport-meet-greet-firm-taxi-pick-up-car-eid/