Wall Street takes some knocks but still standing as Trump tariffs loom
Noel Randewich
4 MIN READ

SAN FRANCISCO (Reuters) - Fears of a global trade war have left Wall Street bruised but not beaten as the Trump administration on Thursday moved closer to enacting tariffs on $34 billion worth of Chinese imports and Beijing threatens to respond immediately.

FILE PHOTO: Traders work on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in New York City, U.S., June 25, 2018. REUTERS/Brendan McDermid
While China accused the United States of “opening fire” on the world, with the tariffs set to take effect on Friday, U.S. stock indexes rose, even with no evidence of last-minute negotiations between U.S. and Chinese officials.

Disputes between the United States and its trading partners have roiled financial markets ranging from stocks to currencies to commodities for months. Stocks have been volatile, the dollar has gained and the yield curve for U.S. Treasuries has flattened.

To view a graphic on Trade conflict and the S&P 500, click: reut.rs/2KSjgM7

Reuters Graphic
Since March 1, when President Donald Trump said he would impose steep tariffs on steel and aluminum, igniting fears of a trade war, S&P 500 industrials .SPLRCI have fallen 4 percent, reflecting the sector’s dependence on international commerce.

SPONSORED

The S&P 1500 steel index .SPCOMSTEEL has lost nearly 8 percent since March 1, as investors worry that a slowdown in global demand could offset U.S. steelmakers’ benefits from tariffs against their foreign competitors.

To view a graphic on Trade bellwethers, click: reut.rs/2tWLSNS

Reuters Graphic
But although the S&P 500 on some days has been hit hard by signs of an escalating trade conflict, the index is up 2 percent so far in 2018, helped by deep corporate tax cuts that have boosted companies’ earnings and led to massive share buybacks.

Reflecting expectations that small U.S. companies are less at risk than multinationals from tariffs, the Russell 2000 index has outperformed the S&P 500, Dow and Nasdaq since early March.

To view a graphic on Small-caps, tech outperform, click: reut.rs/2tVQx2w

Reuters Graphic
Tariffs on $34 billion worth of Chinese goods, the first of a potential total of $450 billion, are due to kick in on Friday over U.S. complaints that China is misappropriating U.S. technology.

Imports of semiconductor-dense products like televisions and smartphones so far have been spared by Trump, but they could be hit if the trade dispute grows.

To view a graphic on Chipmakers at risk, click: reut.rs/2KQWpk0

Reuters Graphic
Car makers, which face higher steel costs due to the tariffs, have been whipsawed. The Trump administration has launched a national security investigation into automobile imports that could lead to additional tariffs.

To view a graphic on Tossed around by tariff talk, click: reut.rs/2NuRHdA

Reuters Graphic
The dollar and U.S. treasuries have also been sensitive. The U.S. dollar index .DXY, which measures the greenback against a basket of currencies, has risen more than 4 percent since March 1. Analysts have said that they expect the dollar to outperform against other currencies in a trade war.

“A rise in trade protectionism would increase global risk aversion and disproportionately affect non-USD countries due to their relative economic openness,” analysts at Bank of America Merrill Lynch said in a recent note.

The yuan dropped more than 3 percent against the dollar in June, more than in any other month since 1994, when China unified the market exchange rate.

Worries about a global trade conflict have pushed long-term Treasury yields lower as investors fret about a slowdown in global economic growth. Meanwhile, short-term rates have risen due to expectations of more interest rate hikes by the Federal Reserve.

To view a graphic on U.S. Treasuries yield curve, click: reut.rs/2IWofK2

Reuters Graphic
Reporting by Noel Randewich; additional reporting by Megan Davies and Richard Leong; editing by Leslie Adler

Our Standards:The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.