Tyson Fury makes victorious return as Sefer Seferi retires after four rounds 

Tyson Fury completed a successful comeback last night here after 30 months out of the ring, with his opponent Sefer Seferi pulled out of the contest by his corner after four rounds. The fight was what we all knew it would be – a one-sided return to action – and promoter Frank Warren confirmed that the heavyweight, formerly the world No 1, would next box next on the undercard of Carl Frampton’s contest at Windsor Park, Belfast, on August 18.

“It felt fantastic to be back,” said Fury. “Want to say thank you to the fans. Manchester, you are wonderful. Seferi came here. I knew he was a tough guy, but his corner pulled him out. It was like I was having my debut again. It has been a long time out of the the ring. There is still work to do.”

“Frank Warren will keep me busy and the calibre of the opponents will keep on rising. I’m aiming to have a title shot by the end of the year.” 

For the record, it was a night of sound and Fury, the self-styled ‘Gypsy King’ notching up his 26th victory. As his name was announced, the roar went up from the crowd for the boxer who has spent almost three months in exile, most of it self-imposed.

Fury had wanted a knockout finish, and rounds under his belt. It began, predictably, with Seferi circling on the outside. Fury landed a pair of fast jabs and a body shot. He showboated with his arms in the air. The crowd roared. “There’s only one Tyson Fury.” He danced. A second jab rocked the 39-year-old Albanian’s head back.

In the second round, Fury played to the 15,000-strong gallery, and was warned by referee Phil Edwards for looking to friends ringside. Momentarily, the two men in the ring were even distracted by a fight that had broken out in the crowd not far from one of the neutral corners, Fury switching his stance to southpaw for the first time.

Fury rocked Seferi with a long straight right in the third, and then later in the round landed a right uppercut and cuffing right hook, gradually throwing off the ring rust. By the fourth, the 6ft 9in tall, 19st 10lb boxer was looking for a decisive finish against an opponent who was five stone lighter than him. Fury unleashed heavy shots in that fourth stanza. But he was denied more by the Albanian’s corner.

Earlier on the Manchester undercard, there was huge disappointment for local fighter Terry Flanagan, who lost a split decision in a World Boxing Organisation super-lightweight world title against American Maurice Hooker with a bizarre set of scores returned by the three ringside officials. 

Flanagan suffered his first defeat in his 34th professional contest as he attempted to become a two-weight world champion. Flanagan moved to 33-1 as Hooker took the WBO 140lb crown home to Texas, the Manchester City football fan failed to add a second WBO title to the version of the lightweight crown that the 28-year-old had held for over two years before moving up a weight division. 

The judges returned the scores of 115-113 and 117-111 for the fighter from Dallas, who improved his unbeaten record to 24 victories, three draws. Those scores meant that two judges diverged in scoring nine rounds to three to each of the fighters. 

The contest see-sawed in the first half of the fight, with the awkward southpaw Flanagan targeting the body of the American, while the visitor looked to get his longer straight shots away. When they engaged, Flanagan’s head found Hooker’s face twice with referee Terry O’Connor choosing not to caution the British boxer. With the rounds seemingly tied at the halfway mark, ironically it was Flanagan who was cut in the seventh, a gash on his forehead and a cut by the left eye, but the unassuming former world champion went to work desperately as his face became a claret mask and as crowd united behind him.

Urged on by his corner, and the baying throng, Flanagan engaged in a more aggressive attack, taking the fight to his opponent. But the fighter who shares a camp with the brilliant American Terence Crawford kept his composure to outbox the popular Mancunian, who tried to outmuscle Hooker. 

Though Flanagan used his left effectively in the last third of the fight, Hooker’s right hands and body shots kept Flanagan behind in the judges’ eyes. Hooker’s work was the cleaner. It was very close as they went into the final round, with Flanagan going for broke, firing off a flurry of shots as they traded at close quarters. As the scores were read out, Hooker dropped to his knees, overcome with emotion.

The city throbbed to the noise of the fight game last night, local legend Ricky Hatton in the ring earlier in the night with his heavyweight protege Nathan Gorman, who stopped Irishman Sean Turner in the third round, after dropping him in the second. Gorman has a traveller heritage as the great nephew of Bartley Gorman, a legendary traveller known as “the king of the gypsies”.

Fury was set to walk through Deansgate followed by his fans, in celebration of being back. He is, but there is still a great deal, of work to do.

