Rails, truckers have gotten cheap but trade wars a risk
Chuck Mikolajczak
NEW YORK (Reuters) - Many U.S. stocks cheapened up during the first quarter’s choppy trading scene, relieving some concern investors had about lofty valuations.
FILE PHOTO: Burlington Northern Santa Fe trains make their way through a rail yard in Chicago November 3, 2009. REUTERS/John Gress/File Photo
But the companies that move goods through a humming economy now look among the market’s best bargains, as long as the U.S.-China trade dispute doesn’t derail their outlook.
Railroad and trucking stocks took a hit starting in late January just like the rest of the market. From its record high on Jan. 26, the S&P 500 .SPX slumped more than 10 percent in less than two weeks to enter a correction, and the S&P 1500 road and rail index .SPCOMRAR fell 9.1 percent.
Demand to move U.S. goods by rail, truck and ship, however, has held firm so far this year. So the shippers emerged from the tumult sporting some of their cheapest valuations in years thanks to an atypical phenomenon: as their share prices were falling, their earnings expectations were moving up sharply - meaning their price-to-earnings ratios fell by an even wider margin.
“The volatility we saw in the first quarter was actually a pretty healthy thing for the entire market, it kind of reset expectations, it kept excess valuations from bubbling up,” said Eric Marshall, portfolio manager and Director of Research, Hodges Capital Management in Dallas, Texas.
That valuation reset may mean more upside for these stocks than the market as a whole if earnings reports in the coming days validate those optimistic profit forecasts.
“Now that it has occurred, people have gone back in, re-evaluated the fundamentals and you are starting to see those stocks work their way back up off of a base,” Marshall said.
J B Hunt Transportation (JBHT.O) may provide investors with a template of what to expect.
The trucker’s shares fell more than 13 percent between late January and early April. But its forward P/E ratio slumped by twice that margin, 27 percent, contracting from 27.2 to 19.8, below its five-year average of 21.5.
By comparison the full S&P 500’s P/E ratio contracted by about 12 percent to 16.3, and still sits above its historic average of 15.1.
The stock surged more than 6 percent in the wake of its earnings on Monday, its best day in five years. Nine of the analysts tracking the stock have raised their price targets since then.
On the rail side, CSX Corp (CSX.O) saw its forward PE drop from 22.02 in mid-January to 16.05 on Feb. 8, well below its five-year average of 19.9. Its shares rose nearly 8 percent on Wednesday, its best day in six years, following its quarterly results to send the stock to a record closing high of $61.01.
“If you are looking at it in a quite linear focus, you think it would affect the rails probably because they move a lot of exported goods and they are susceptible to what goes on in trade,” said Lindsay Bettiol, analyst at Atlantic Equities in London.
.

