HOLIDAY HORROR Two Thailand tourist boats carrying 130 people capsize off holiday hotspot Phuket sparking search for seven missing

Phuket officials had earlier issued a warning of severe weather until next Tuesday, including heavy rain and winds

COPS in the southern Thailand resort of Phuket say at least seven people are missing after rough seas overturned two boats carrying more than 130 tourists.

Phuket Provincial Police commander Major General Teerapol Tipcharoen said 90 people had been rescued from one boat, but seven were still unaccounted for.

He said the boat that overturned Thursday evening was carrying Chinese tourists.

The police chief said 39 tourists, Chinese and European, were forced to abandon a second boat, but they were rescued and have been returned to land.

Channel 7 earlier reported 48 people were saved and 49 were missing. The reason for the discrepancy was not immediately clear.

Thai media showed photos of people rescued from one of the ships in large rubber life-rafts at sea, with fishing boats and churning water in the background.

The accidents were not reported to be related.

Phuket officials had earlier issued a warning of severe weather until next Tuesday, including heavy rain and winds.

This comes after at least six people died when an "overcrowded" ferry in Indonesia carrying 139 passengers sank after being battered by 13ft waves, reports local media.

Dramatic pictures show cars sliding into the choppy water as terrified victims wearing orange life jackets helplessly cling on for their lives.

Officials have confirmed six people have died following the incident off the coast of Sulawesi island, reports the Rappler.

Strong winds smashed the KM Lestari ferry with 13ft waves filling it with water and eventually sinking it.

The ship was sailing from Bira, on Sulawesi, to Pamatata, on Selayar island, when it capsized.

According to local media, the boat was overcrowded meaning there were not enough life jackets for all the passengers on board.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6704242/two-thailand-tourist-boats-carrying-130-people-capsize-off-holiday-hotspot-phuket-sparking-search-for-seven-missing/

