Bobtail squid coat their eggs in antifungal goo
MADISON, Wis. — When eggs go bad, bacteria usually get the blame. But some bacteria help bobtail squid keep their eggs fresh.

Bacteria that female Hawaiian bobtail squid (Euprymna scolopes) deposit in the jelly surrounding their eggs can fight off a fungus called Fusarium keratoplasticum, Spencer Nyholm reported July 9 at the Beneficial Microbes Conference.

A specialized organ called the accessory nidamental gland is found only in female bobtail squid and other cephalopods. The organ houses bacteria, mostly varieties of Rhodobacteraceae and Verrucomicrobia, and helps coat eggs with a thick layer of protective jelly impregnated with the microbes.

Nyholm, of the University of Connecticut in Storrs, and colleagues treated squid eggs with antibiotics to kill the bacteria. The eggs grew fuzzy with fungus, and the developing squid embryos soon died.

Bacteria from the accessory nidamental gland make several types of antifungal chemicals, including some that haven’t been characterized before, the researchers discovered. Some of those antifungal chemicals also inhibited growth of some bacteria and other fungi, including Candida albicans, a type of fungus that causes infections in humans. Squid bacteria may one day be a source of new kinds of natural antibiotics or antifungal drugs, Nyholm says.

A ShanghaiTech University-led team has revealed the structures of a serotonin receptor when bound to a polypharmacologic drug—one that binds to many receptors—and when bound to a selective drug. In doing so, they elucidated multiple receptor properties that may enable more intelligent drug design.

The team imaged a specific class of serotonin receptor, known as a 5-HT2c receptor, when bound to the polypharmacologic biomolecule ergotamine. By comparing the complex’s structure to other known ergotamine-complementary receptors, the researchers identified ten points of interaction that are highly conserved across many receptors and facilitate ergotamine binding.

In contrast, the drug ritanserin is selective towards the 5-HT2 family of serotonin receptors and, on examination, revealed a binding profile not found outside of the family.

The different changes induced in 5-HT2c by ergotamine and ritanserin indicate distinct signaling mechanisms that may inform future efforts into pathway-specific drugs.
Porn actress Stormy Daniels was arrested at an Ohio strip club and is accused of letting patrons touch her in violation of a state law, her attorney said early Thursday.

While Daniels was performing Wednesday night at Sirens, a strip club in Columbus, some patrons touched her in a “non-sexual” way, her lawyer, Michael Avenatti, told The Associated Press.

An Ohio law known as the Community Defense Act prohibits anyone who isn’t a family member to touch a nude or semi-nude dancer.

Daniels, whose real name is Stephanie Clifford, was in police custody early Thursday morning and was expected to face a misdemeanor charge, Avenatti said.

She was released on bail before 6 a.m. Thursday.

“This was a complete set up,” he said. “It’s absurd that law enforcement resources are being spent to conduct a sting 