Reciprocity is the method to Trump's madness
Critics of Donald Trump claim there is no rhyme or reason to his foreign policy. But if there is a consistency, it might be called reciprocity.

President Trump tries to force other countries to treat the U.S. as it treats them. In “don’t tread on me” style, he also warns enemies that any aggressive act will be replied to in kind.

The underlying principle of Trump commercial reciprocity is that the United States is no longer powerful or wealthy enough to alone underwrite the security of the West. It can no longer assume sole enforcement of the rules and protocols of the postwar global order.

This year there have been none of the usual Iranian provocations — frequent during the Obama administration — of harassing American ships in the Persian Gulf. Apparently, the Iranians now realize that anything they do to an American ship will be replied to with overwhelming force.

Ditto North Korea. After lots of threats from Kim Jong-un about using his new ballistic missiles against the United States, Mr. Trump warned that he would use America’s far greater arsenal to eliminate North Korea’s arsenal for good.

Mr. Trump is said to be undermining NATO by questioning its usefulness some 69 years after its founding. Yet unlike 1948, Germany is no longer down. The United States is always in. And Russia is hardly out, but instead cutting energy deals with the Europeans.
President Trump is learning some hard lessons — winning a trade war is tough stuff. It’s not like campaigning or reality TV — those share a lot in common — but rather a difficult process of winning allies and defining reasonable objectives.

We have been in a trade war for decades, but China has been doing all the shooting. It blocks access to its markets with high tariffs and a myriad of discriminatory regulations, and compels foreign investors to take joint venture partners, reveal trade secrets and transfer prized technology. What it can’t get that way, it steals — and industrial espionage is virtually a state-run enterprise.

The tariffs the United States is levying, 25 percent on $50 billion worth of Chinese industrial and transportation goods and components, are hardly enough to move China for three reasons.

China is retaliating by hitting products made in pro-Trump precincts — items like soybeans, automotive products and bourbon whiskey — causing much more discomfort for his political allies than he can bring to bear on unelected Chinese Communist Party officials.

Mr. Trump’s trade team is divided. The Treasury secretary seems to think the nearly $600 billion trade deficit and attendant foreign borrowing are hardly a problem, and the hawks on the trade team believe the disruptions imposed on American manufactures, when they can’t get Chinese components at reasonable prices, can be remedied by bringing the supply chain back home. Both are patently false and a good reason for President Xi not to take seriously American demands.

Most importantly, these economic sanctions are aimed at changing how the entire Chinese economy is organized. For example, forcing Beijing to abandon tactics for accomplishing global leadership in high technology by 2025 would require removing something a civilization founded on thousands of years of autocratic rule and attendant corruption desperately needs to succeed — guidance for businesses that look to political authority instead of market signals to make big bets, and subsidies to overcome the overhead imposed by corruption.