SMUT CRACKDOWN Posting revenge porn to Facebook should mean two years in jail as courts told to toughen up
Repeatedly posting revenge porn and actively planning to keep it online will land perpetrators the toughest punishments
PEOPLE found guilty of repeatedly sharing revenge porn on social media sites like Facebook will face the strictest punishment of two years' in jail as new sentencing guidelines are enforced.
Those who set up fake online profiles or websites to post private sexual images and videos without permission, commonly known as revenge porn, will also receive the toughest penalties available.It marks the first time the Sentencing Council for England and Wales has issued instructions to courts on perpetrators that aim to fuel the distress and humiliation of ex-lovers, partners and spouses by uploading their intimate pics and videos.
The guidelines also span a range of "intimidatory" offences including stalking and harassment.
The offence of disclosing private sexual images without consent was introduced in 2015 and carries a maximum sentence of two years.
In 2016/17 there were 465 prosecutions over revenge porn allegations in England and Wales.
The government says that revenge porn "material not only covers images that show the pubic region, but anything that a reasonable person would consider to be sexual so this could be a picture of someone who is engaged in sexual behaviour or posing in a sexually provocative way."
The new guidelines, published on Thursday, will be consulted by judges and magistrates from October 1 when sentencing those found guilty of a range of of "intimidatory" offences.
They include an additional factor that would show "high culpability" on the part of the perpetrator of “repeated efforts to keep images available for viewing”, leading to the strongest sentence.
This was added in light of the nature of online revenge porn crimes that see some offenders re-posting images on social media many times after websites take them down.
Tougher punishments will also be handed down to perpetrators that show "significant planning", such as setting up fake social media profiles to post the images and inviting others to comment and contact the revenge porn victim.