Valve's video game marketplace Steam is now the anti-App Store
Apple's "walled garden" approach to the App Store may not be perfect, but it does make life harder for racists, homophobes, and other purveyors of hate to peddle their goods.
The same can't be said for Steam, however. The PC gaming marketplace owned and operated by Valve Corporation was at the center of controversy just last week over a product listing for a game called Active Shooter, which allowed players to step into the role of a marauding school shooter.
Valve removed the listing after widespread outcry led to mainstream media coverage, and the company's public address of the matter concluded with a promise: "The broader conversation about Steam's content policies is one that we'll be addressing soon."
That promise has now been kept. On Wednesday, Valve released a lengthy defense of its content policies under the headline: "Who Gets To Be On The Steam Store?" It's almost 1,200 words of explanation that can be summed up as such:
We just own the platform, we're not responsible for the products that are sold here.
Instead of explaining everything to you in exhaustive detail, I've decided to share Valve's own words with you in full, along with annotated explanations of what it all means. I'm hoping I can add some additional context that makes clear just how dangerous and how wrong it is for Valve to take the position it's laid out.
Recently there's been a bunch of community discussion around what kind of games we're allowing onto the Steam Store. As is often the case, the discussion caused us to spend some time examining what we're doing, why we're doing it, and how we could be doing it better. Decision making in this space is particularly challenging, and one that we've really struggled with. Contrary to many assumptions, this isn't a space we've automated - humans at Valve are very involved, with groups of people looking at the contents of every controversial title submitted to us. Similarly, people have falsely assumed these decisions are heavily affected by our payment processors, or outside interest groups. Nope, it's just us grappling with a really hard problem.

Unfortunately, our struggling has resulted in a bunch of confusion among our customers, developer partners, and even our own employees. So we've spent some time thinking about where we want to be on this, and we'd like to talk about it now. But we also think it's critical to talk about how we've arrived at our position, so you can understand the trade-offs we're making. 
Everyone is mad at us for the harmful content that's been appearing in our store, even though we've never been fully transparent about how that happens in the first place. That vacuum of information has led to an abundance of fake news about the Steam platform.
Now that long-held concerns over what we sell and why we sell it have reached a fever pitch, we feel it's time to step up and offer an explanation that justifies our choices.
The challenge is that this problem is not simply about whether or not the Steam Store should contain games with adult or violent content. Instead, it's about whether the Store contains games within an entire range of controversial topics - politics, sexuality, racism, gender, violence, identity, and so on. In addition, there are controversial topics that are particular to games - like what even constitutes a "game", or what level of quality is appropriate before something can be released.
We feel that all content concerns exist on a completely level playing field. Your issue with a game that explores a hot-button topic like racism and sexuality exists on the same plane as someone else's belief that an exploration-focused experience where you walk around and piece together a story doesn't actually qualify as a "game."
Common questions we ask ourselves when trying to make decisions didn't help in this space. What do players wish we would do? What would make them most happy? What's considered acceptable discussion / behavior / imagery varies significantly around the world, socially and legally. Even when we pick a single country or state, the legal definitions around these topics can be too broad or vague to allow us to avoid making subjective and interpretive decisions. The harsh reality of this space, that lies at the root of our dilemma, is that there is absolutely no way we can navigate it without making some of our players really mad. 
[Author's note: This paragraph is so all over the place.]
Please try to follow along as we sew together a few false equivalencies. Our customers are important and we aim to please them. Sometimes they want things that may not be legal in certain markets that we service. Following all those laws is hard, especially since some of them are so vaguely written. As a result, we make people mad sometimes.
In addition, Valve is not a small company - we're not a homogeneous group. The online debates around these topics play out inside Valve as well. We don't all agree on what deserves to be on the Store. So when we say there's no way to avoid making a bunch of people mad when making decisions in this space, we're including our own employees, their families and their communities in that. 
We have some people on staff who are totally chill with defending the merits of products like Active Shooter or Gay World, despite their objectively problematic content.
So we ended up going back to one of the principles in the forefront of our minds when we started Steam, and more recently as we worked on Steam Direct to open up the Store to many more developers: Valve shouldn't be the ones deciding this. If you're a player, we shouldn't be choosing for you what content you can or can't buy. If you're a developer, we shouldn't be choosing what content you're allowed to create. Those choices should be yours to make. Our role should be to provide systems and tools to support your efforts to make these choices for yourself, and to help you do it in a way that makes you feel comfortable. 
Steam is Valve's platform, yes, but we're not willing to act as the service's gatekeeper. We should instead give you, our customers, the ability to use our service in blissful ignorance by eliminating from your feed anything you find offensive. Sure, all the problematic stuff will still be there. But if you can't see it, your shopping experience will be more pleasant.
With that principle in mind, we've decided that the right approach is to allow everything onto the Steam Store, except for things that we decide are illegal, or straight up trolling. Taking this approach allows us to focus less on trying to police what should be on Steam, and more on building those tools to give people control over what kinds of content they see. We already have some tools, but they're too hidden and not nearly comprehensive enough. We are going to enable you to override our recommendation algorithms and hide games containing the topics you're not interested in. So if you don't want to see anime games on your Store, you'll be able to make that choice. If you want more options to control exactly what kinds of games your kids see when they browse the Store, you'll be able to do that. And it's not just players that need better tools either - developers who build controversial content shouldn't have to deal with harassment because their game exists, and we'll be building tools and options to support them too. 
Here's more on how those tools will work, just so you're all really super clear that we are a marketplace for everyone, regardless of their views or beliefs. 
We're going to help the developers, too. If you make a game like Active Shooter, we're going to make sure you have the ability to ensure that people who might criticize such a monstrous creation won't be able to find it easily.
As we mentioned earlier, laws vary around the world, so we're going to need to handle this on a case-by-case basis. As a result, we will almost certainly continue to struggle with this one for a while. Our current thinking is that we're going to push developers to further disclose any potentially problematic content in their games during the submission process, and cease doing business with any of them that refuse to do so honestly. We'll still continue to perform technical evaluations of submissions, rejecting games that don't pass until their issues have been resolved. 
Also, developers? We're going to encourage you to tell us up front when your game includes content that's going to piss off a lot of people. We won't judge you. As long as you don't lie, all will be chill. We'll still test your game to make sure it works, but that's as far as we'll go with content curation.
So what does this mean? It means that the Steam Store is going to contain something that you hate, and don't think should exist. Unless you don't have any opinions, that's guaranteed to happen. But you're also going to see something on the Store that you believe should be there, and some other people will hate it and want it not to exist. 
Let's spell that out one more time: Steam is fine with selling hateful content. Our focus is more on letting you remain ignorant to the existence of whatever you find offensive, even if it's objectively problematic to all rational sensibilities.
It also means that the games we allow onto the Store will not be a reflection of Valve’s values, beyond a simple belief that you all have the right to create & consume the content you choose. The two points above apply to all of us at Valve as well. If you see something on Steam that you think should not exist, it's almost certain that someone at Valve is right there with you.  

To be explicit about that - if we allow your game onto the Store, it does not mean we approve or agree with anything you're trying to say with it. If you're a developer of offensive games, this isn't us siding with you against all the people you're offending. There will be people throughout the Steam community who hate your games, and hope you fail to find an audience, and there will be people here at Valve who feel exactly the same way. However, offending someone shouldn't take away your game's voice. We believe you should be able to express yourself like everyone else, and to find others who want to play your game. But that's it.  
And by the way: The opinions of Steam developers do not mirror our own.
To make that even clearer: Yes, we really are abdicating all responsibility for the content that appears on our platform, even though, as the owner of Steam, we are technically that platform's gatekeeper.
In the short term, we won't be making significant changes to what's arriving on Steam until we've finished some of the tools we've described in this post. As we've hopefully managed to convey, navigating these issues is messy and complicated. Countries and societies change their laws and cultural norms over time. We'll be working on this for the foreseeable future, both in terms of what products we're allowing, what guidelines we communicate, and the tools we're providing to developers and players. 
In case none of this goes over well, everything we just told you is technically hypothetical and happening sometime in the future. Probably. The world changes all the time, so who knows?
Basically, we're giving ourselves an out. Now, no one expects anything more than this blog post for the time being.