"How to score free PC games from Twitch
All five games are completely free for Amazon Prime subscribers -- and these are just the March offers.
Twitch
Amazon giveth... and just keeps on giveth-ing.
Starting Thursday, Amazon Prime subscribers can score free PC games from Twitch, the service that lets players record and share in-game videos.
The program is officially called Free Games with Prime, and it works like this: Each month you'll have a window in which to claim a selection of free titles. Once you do that, they're yours to keep.
Right now, for example, and until March 31, you can get the following titles (shown with their current prices on Steam):
Top-down superhero action-adventure Mr. Shifty ($15)
Indie horror adventure Oxenfree ($20)
Hardcore tactical-stealth game Shadow Tactics ($40)
Bullet-time shooter Superhot ($25)
Dungeons & Dragons action-RPG Tales from Candlekeep: Tomb of Annihilation ($16)
That's a combined value of well over $100, and there are five more titles already queued up for April (including Telltale Games' Tales from the Borderland).
How to get your games
Enable your Twitch Prime membership before you claim your free games.
Twitch
Assuming you already have an Amazon Prime subscription, it's a simple matter to start snagging your freebies:
Step 1: You first need to sign up for a Twitch account.
Step 2: Enable your Twitch Prime membership (also free with Prime).
Step 3: Head to Twitch proper and log into your newly created (and newly Prime-enabled) account.
Step 4: Click the crown icon in the toolbar at the top of the page (near the right side).
Step 5: Scroll through the list of loot and look for all ""Free Games with Prime"" offers. If there's one you want, click Claim Offer.
There's one final piece of the puzzle, and that's the Twitch Desktop App, which is the client you'll need to download and install your games.
And that's it! Happy gaming.
More Prime Perks
Amazon Prime: 20 benefits every member gets
5 ways your Amazon Prime subscription can make you healthy
The 7 best perks of your new Amazon Prime subscription
Share your voice
3 comments
Tags
The Cheapskate Gaming"
