Glenn McCrory: 'Dehydration is the last taboo of boxing - I was so weak before a fight I feared for my life' 

Former world champion Glenn McCrory knew he was going to lose his cruiserweight world title in 1990 having had issues with the weight cut, and is now campaigning to have dehydration - the ‘last taboo of boxing', as he calls it - addressed for the sake of the sport’s safety.

McCrory, now a television and radio pundit, who also sparred almost 100 rounds with Mike Tyson in his heyday, has taken up a role as global ambassador for a mineral and hydration supplement specialist.

He says the importance of hydration for boxers before, during and after a fight is something he will seek to draw attention to continually until the sport successfully deals with it. McCrory believes encouraging new products to help fighters stay hydrated, and making the issue transparent, can only help the obvious inherent dangers boxers face.

McCrory speaks from experience, saying dehydration damaged his career in the ring - and could potentially even have cost him his life.

“When I defended my world title against Jeff Lampkin in 1990, I was so dehydrated making the weight that I knew I was going to lose the fight even before I got into the ring. I was so weak and exhausted that my biggest fear wasn’t losing the title, I feared for my life. I genuinely mean that."

He added: “The obvious dangers of dehydration is the the elephant in the room when it comes to boxing - it is the last taboo - and the sport needs to have an honest conversation about it." It continues, he insists, in recent contests he has witnessed.

“Nothing has changed since then in boxing though - the problem has never gone away. People have talked about Lee Selby struggling to make the weight being a factor in his defeat to Josh Warrington last month, and there's Jamie McDonnell who lost his WBA bantamweight title in the first round [in Japan] after a lot of contoversy of his making the weight before supposedly piling the pounds on after the weigh-in. The consequences of dehydration can be much more severe though than just losing a fight - you're playing Russian roulette with your health."

McCrory has taken up an unsalaried position with CellNutrition Sport, a mineral and hydration supplement specialist and insisted to The Telegraph that he will remain passionate about promoting the issue, which he says is arguably the single biggest health concern in boxing. “It's natural, fighters are always looking for an advantage in the sport and are prepared to go to great lengths to get it. But boxers are still routinely taking risks in terms of dehydration to get down to certain weights and we need to look at that, and also hydration levels generally in the run-up to fights and post-fight too."

“There has been so much focus on safety in boxing in recent decades, and no end of examination of things like the size, weight, design and make-up of boxing gloves, but the subject of hydration seems to go under the radar. And yet in some ways it is the most important safety issue of all - it has damaged careers and lives and although you might never completely phase it out of the sport, there are steps you can take to counteract it. The most important first step though, is to talk about it."

“If we don’t, then the problem is going to continue and every bad headline is going to damage the sport - and believe me, those bad headlines will keep on coming unless we do something about it. I think we have to tackle it for the sake of the reputation of the sport but more importantly still for the safety of fighters worldwide. Personally speaking, I’ve had a great career in boxing - first in the ring and then in the boxing media - but I’d love nothing more than if my biggest achievement was to help have the subject of hydration in the sport re-assessed.”

The 53-year-old plans to raise the subject at the World Boxing Council’s annual convention being held in Kiev this October.

“I see this as a cause for improvement in the sport that everyone can unite behind and I’m sure that I’ll get a sympathetic listen because it’s something that the top people in boxing know remains an issue.

“I don’t care if it takes time for something significant to be done by the boxing authorities - I’m happy to dig in for the long haul. This is a cause I passionately believe in and I’m delighted I have been given me a platform to raise its profile.”

