Watch out for these Facebook 'like' scams - and how to avoid them

Facebook users continue to fall for the same old scams: "like this post for the chance to win a holiday to Barbados", or "share this post to be one of the lucky 1,000 users Mark Zuckerberg is giving $4.5 million (£3 mn) to", and "click attending to the Total Wipeout tour coming to a city near you."

These Facebook campaigns are all fake, designed to "farm" likes and get millions of eyeballs in front of a scam. Once the fake pages, events and profiles garner enough likes, Facebook's algorithms automatically float them to the top of millions of people's newsfeeds, and the scammers swoop in. They change the content of the posts to trick people to give out personal information, or coerce them into downloading malicious software.
Promoted Stories

Earlier this month, a fake Facebook page claimed it would bring the obstacle course from popular BBC program Total Wipeout to different spots across the UK.

It was later blocked from Facebook, and found to be a scam that was collecting personal details from users such as their birth date and email address. 

As many as 5 per cent of accounts on Facebook could be fake, according to the social media company, a number that has been growing year on year. Although the exact number of fake profiles isn’t clear it could be more than 170 million. Facebook, which has 1.6 billion monthly active users, struggles to stop these accounts from getting millions of likes as they are good at posing as legitimate and harmless.

Posts that appear harmless at first are often changed later on to phish for users’ personal data, or encourage them to download malware.

Tips to avoid being hacked on Facebook
Because Facebook is a social network, we tend to trust what people post - after all, they're mostly friends, colleagues and relatives. This makes it far easier for scammers and hackers to get you through "social engineering" - emotionally manipulating you to disclose personal details. 

Here are five tips and tracks to avoid Facebook scams. 

1. If it looks too good to be true…
... Then it probably is. Treat every post with a healthy dose of skepticism, especially if the post has an emotional pull in the headline, or is offering something that looks too good to be true.  

2. Only like posts from brands and people you know
One way to avoid being duped by scammers is to only like and share posts from brands and people that you trust. Stick to verified accounts, your friends, and brands you’ve interacted with before.

3. Be careful about giving permissions
Always check what data is being asked for before clicking “accept” to third party terms and conditions on Facebook. Last year, the “What are your most used words on Facebook?” quiz, which was shared over 16 million times in a weekend, gathered the personal information, friends list, IP addresses and device information from millions of users.

4. Review your likes
Look through the list of posts you have like and shared in the past. If the content of any of them has changed to something that looks suspicious unlike or unshare it, and report it to Facebook.

5. Get out of the liking habit
Think twice before liking or reacting to a post, especially if it asks you to like or share, and offers you a reward for doing so. Not only does this allow Facebook to create a detailed dossier of your likes and behaviours, in order to track you better, it also helps scammers to disseminate their posts more widely on the social network. 

6. Watch out for multimedia
The most common scams to avoid are viral videos, profile customisation tools, who viewed your profile plug-ins and free giveaways. Games or quizzes that ask for an extraordinary amount of personal info are also red flags. 