Dani Rowe fights through the pain to finish third behind Marianne Vos and Women's Tour winner Coryn Rivera

It was, she said, the “hardest, most painful day” of her career. But in the end Dani Rowe just about clung on, finishing in the bunch in Colwyn Bay at the end of stage five to wrap up a hugely impressive third place in the Ovo Energy Women’s Tour.

Rowe was unable to catch Coryn Rivera (Sunweb), the long-time race leader, who secured a deserved overall victory by 11 seconds from Rowe’s WaowDeals team-mate Marianne Vos.

But the fact that Rowe finished the race at all was fairly remarkable, and owed much to the kindness of strangers.

Less than 24 hours earlier, the London 2012 Olympic gold medallist had suffered a 60kph crash, which left her nursing a nasty case of road rash and a badly swollen knee. Rowe’s Twitter SOS on Saturday night, appealing for “someone in the Telford area” to come to her rescue with an ice compression machine, was answered by one Gary Darling-Parkes, a medic with GWAS Ambulance.

Mr Darling-Parkes was not even in the Telford area. He was at a polo event in Cardiff. But he made a special four-hour round trip to Rowe’s hotel on Saturday night to deliver the equipment and apply tape to her leg.

“I’d never met the guy before in my life,” Rowe said on Sunday after collapsing just beyond the finish line and breaking down in tears. “He was absolutely amazing.”

Even with the help of her Good Samaritan, Rowe still had to produce one of the gutsiest performances of her career. With the top-28 riders in the field all separated by less than a minute, a couple of Snowdonia climbs ahead of them and some foul weather closing in, stage five was always going to be a battle. And so it proved.

Rowe was dropped from the front group on the first categorised climb of the day, Bwlch-y-maen, but managed to get back on.

Then, having made it over the day’s major climb Nant Gwynant in touch with the leaders, she missed a key move; Kasia Niewiadoma (Canyon-SRAM), Elisa Longo Borghini (Wiggle-High5), Amy Pieters (Boels-Dolmans) and the Sunweb duo of Lucinda Brand and Rivera escaping with 20?kilometres remaining and opening up a gap of 16 seconds.

“I was just hoping it would come back because there was absolutely nothing I could do at that stage,” Rowe admitted.

Fortunately for her - with Mitchelton-Scott and Cippolini happy to help with the chase - it did.

“Even then, when we hit the [North Wales] coast with 4km to go, it was absolute gutter action because of the wind,” Rowe added. “I’ve never suffered so much in a race, in terms of being in pain.

“I think it’s my best ever result on the road. In this field there is no one missing. It’s top class.”

Rowe's third place finish matches that achieved by Hannah Barnes [Canyon-SRAM] last year. Barnes unfortunately was not at her best this week, only really feeling herself in the last couple of stages.

Organisers SweetSpot will ultimately reflect happily on this fifth edition of the race, which continues to set the benchmark for women’s cycling. But they will reflect, too, that the race could have been harder. Every stage ended in some form of sprint. It could be longer, too. The need for a couple more stages, plus live television coverage – an absolute must in this day and age – are the next priorities if the women are truly to claim parity with the men’s Tour of Britain.




