Lots of Successful Women Are Freezing Their Eggs. But It May Not Be About Their Careers.
“Freeze Your Eggs, Free Your Career,” announced the headline of a Bloomberg Businessweek cover 
story in 2014. It was the year that Facebook and then Apple began offering egg freezing as a 
benefit to employees. Hundreds of think pieces followed, debating the costs and benefits of 
“postponing procreation” in the name of professional advancement.
In the years since, many more women across the world have frozen their eggs. Many are highly 
educated. But the decision may have very little to do with work, at least according to a new 
study. In interviews with 150 American and Israeli women who had undergone one cycle, career 
planning came up as the primary factor exactly two times.
Instead, most women focused on another reason: they still hadn’t found a man to build a family with.
“The stereotype that these ambitious career women are freezing their eggs for the purposes of their 
career — that’s really inaccurate at the present time,” said Marcia Inhorn, a medical anthropologist 
from Yale University, and one of the authors of the study, which was presented Monday at the 
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology’s conference in Spain.
Most of these mid-to-late 30s women were already established in their careers by the time they got to the clinic, the study found.
“They weren’t freezing to advance; they were facing the overarching problem of partnership,” she 
said. This was the case, even among those who worked for companies that offered to pay for the 
procedure.
Though a single woman, headed toward 40, may feel like a freakish anomaly as she freezes her eggs 
because she hasn’t found a partner, she’s not. This finding echoes other studies in the United 
States and Britain that have similarly found that it’s the absence of a partner that drives most 
women to freeze their eggs.
The subjects in this particular study, which has not yet been published, came from seven different 
fertility clinics. In the United States, the women generally lived in cities along the East Coast 
or in the Bay Area. They ranged in age from 29 to 42, with three-quarters falling between 35 and 39.  
The research approach taken by Dr. Inhorn and her co-authors Dr. Pasquale Patrizio, director of the 
Yale Fertility Center, and Daphna Birenbaum-Carmeli of the University of Haifa, involved asking 
women — both single and those who had partners — to share their egg freezing stories and then 
analyzing their responses to try to understand their primary motives.
