Dozens of Barack Obama staffers run for office to protect his legacy from Donald Trump


Andy Kim was in hospital when he decided to run for Congress. Attending a check-up with his wife Kammy, pregnant with their second child, Mr Kim was told there were complications. 

Their unborn son was underweight, the doctor informed them. The cause was unclear, but if the situation did not improve there was no guarantee the baby would survive after birth. 

"I was terrified,” recalled Mr Kim, 35, to The Daily Telegraph. “My wife and I were so scared. There was very little that we could do to control the situation.” 

Sitting in a waiting room as the news sunk in, Mr Kim's eyes were drawn to a television. On the screen were leading figures of the Republican Party, cheerily touting their determination to repeal Obamacare. 

"That's what it was for me,” said Mr Kim, remembering how he thought of those who would lose coverage if the 44th president's healthcare legislation was wiped out. 

 "As a father of a baby boy that might have problems himself, that is what made me step up and run for Congress." 

But for Mr Kim there was another personal link too. For most of the last decade he had worked for Barack Obama. 

First he held positions in Mr Obama's administration, as an Iraq expert at the State Department and an adviser to general David Petraeus. Then he went to the White House, heading up Iraq policy in a role that saw him frequently in the Oval Office and situation room. 

Mr Kim is not alone in his decision to run for office. No fewer than 67 former Obama staffers or administration figures are standing at the November mid-term elections - a number that keeps on rising.

Some are seeking positions at state level, others aiming for Washington. But most share two traits - they have never run for office before and are determined to defend Mr Obama’s legacy. 

Even the briefest scan of Donald Trump’s presidency explains why. Many of Mr Obama’s flagship achievements are being systematically dismantled by his successor. 

America has withdrawn from the Paris climate agreement and Iran nuclear deal. Post-crash financial regulations have been loosened, the Affordable Care Act gutted, albeit not yet scrapped.

Abroad, Mr Trump has swapped Mr Obama’s sober diplomacy and free trade with confrontation and tariffs, while at home he rarely misses a chance to swipe at his predecessor. 

Mr Obama himself has largely avoided criticising Mr Trump since leaving the White House, save for the odd veiled critique, but his former aides are rushing to the political frontline in his place. 

For Buffy Wicks, it was Mr Obama’s departing words as president that convinced her to run. She had been one of the first people hired to the one-time Illinois senator’s unlikely tilt at the 2008 presidency. 

She ran the operation in Missouri that year and is credited with co-designing the grassroots organisation model that thrust Mr Obama into the Oval Office. Roles in the White House and the 2012 re-election campaign followed. 

Come January 2017, Ms Wicks was still reeling from Mr Trump’s out-of-the-blue victory when she listened to her old boss deliver his departing speech.  

“If you’re tired of arguing with strangers on the Internet, try to talk with one in real life,” Mr Obama urged his supporters. “If something needs fixing, lace up your shoes and do some organising.

“If you’re disappointed by your elected officials, grab a clipboard, get some signatures, and run for office yourself. Show up. Dive in. Persevere.” 

For Ms Wicks, 40, it was a call to arms. “I learned so much from President Obama; his style of governing and who you are as a person,” she said. 

“Donald Trump is horrifying, I don’t even know how to put it into words. He is trying to undermine the Obama legacy at every turn. 

“He is trying to roll back strong progressive politics. I want to do what I can to protect and build on what we achieved.”

To do so she is running for the California State Assembly. After decades campaigning for others, Ms Wicks' name will be on the ballot paper on November 6. 

Helping her and all those others is a wider network - the Obama Alumni Association. Comprised of 15,000 former staffers and administration officials, it is part-campaign organisation, part-friends reunited. 

The group has no outside funding or paid staff, relying instead on the good will of a few ex-Obama aides, some of whom still work for the former president. 

It acts as a way for old colleagues to stay together - the Philadelphia branch holds an annual ‘Joe Biden Fest’ to celebrate the former vice president - but also to organise local activism. 

Ms Wicks said her branch, one of around 20 sub-divisions across America, has helped with campaigning. “We’re a close knit family, we’re always supporting each other,” she said. 

Mr Obama, busy with a memoir and multi-million pound Netflix deal, is yet to endorse any of the group, but he is expected to hit the campaign trail soon. 

According to Katie Hill, Mr Obama’s communications director, the former president is thrilled that so many of his aides have entered the political arena. 

“When President Obama ran for office in 2008 he said the campaign wasn’t about him, it was about all of us,” Ms Hill said.

“It doesn’t surprise him that the staff members who joined him on that journey, and who worked every day on behalf of the American people in the Obama administration, are emerging as the next generation of leaders and elected officials.” 

Mr Kim will not have long to wait for his first taste of electoral politics - his primary to be the Democrat candidate for New Jersey’s third district is on Tuesday. 

His second child, August, eventually got through the health scare. He is now a healthy 10-month-old boy and is even "a bit fat", Mr Kim joked. 

Come election day, Mr Kim hopes it will be him heading to Capitol Hill so that Obamacare and his old boss's other achievements will be that bit more secure from the Trump presidency. 