How Trump Went From ‘Fire and Fury’ to Dismissing North Korean Nuclear Advances
WASHINGTON — When the North Koreans were shooting off missile tests and detonating new, more 
powerful atomic bombs last year, President Trump responded with threats of “fire and fury” and 
ordered the military to come up with new, if highly risky, pre-emptive strike options.
But since the one-day summit meeting last month in Singapore, Mr. Trump has done an about-face, 
while the North’s nuclear program has continued. “Many good conversations with North Korea-it is 
going well!” he wrote Tuesday morning on Twitter.
Even the recent revelations of seemingly modest North Korean progress on missile technology and the 
production of nuclear fuel — including continued work on a new nuclear reactor that can produce 
plutonium — have not dimmed Mr. Trump’s enthusiasm. He argues that they mean little compared to the 
new tone of conversations, and that even though North Korea has not disassembled a single weapon, 
his mission should be judged a success. It is that jarring reversal of tone that has led Mr. Trump’s critics to argue that he was taken in 
by Kim Jong-un, the North’s 34-year-old leader.
Turning the enthusiasm of the meeting in Singapore into a concrete, verifiable agreement is now the 
job of Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, who is leaving Washington early Thursday for North Korea. It 
will be his third trip there, but the first to flesh out a timetable and a common understanding of 
what the Singapore commitment to “work toward denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula” really 
means. Complicating the task is this: Mr. Pompeo, a former C.I.A. chief who knows the details of 
the North Korean program intimately and has solicited plans for how to accomplish his goals, must 
show that he can get the North Koreans to go far beyond the agreement his predecessor once-removed, 
John Kerry, achieved in negotiations with Iran. Mr. Trump has called that deal a “disaster” for 
years and pulled out of it two months ago.
By engaging Mr. Trump in the process of “denuclearizing” the Korean Peninsula, Mr. Kim may be 
calculating that the president would not dare walk away — especially after Mr. Trump noted before 
the summit meeting that “everyone thinks” he should win a Nobel Peace Prize, before modestly adding, 
“but I would never say it.”
Still, the test missile engine site that Mr. Trump told reporters was being dismantled still stands, 
satellite pictures show. And the C.I.A., among other agencies, has warned that the North’s strategy 
may now be to build up abilities that can be traded away later, hoping to maneuver Mr. Trump into 
accepting the country as a de facto nuclear power, and settle for concessions on the size and reach 
of Mr. Kim’s nuclear force.
Mr. Trump and his allies say that is nonsense; sanctions remain and Mr. Trump has not flinched from 
the goal of “complete, verifiable, irreversible denuclearization.”

