Dustin Johnson leads the US Open as Ian Poulter slips out of contention with triple-bogey at Shinnecock Hills 

Just when it seemed Dustin Johnson’s runaway lead was to be hauled back by two inspired Englishmen, so the US Open issued its harsh but timely reminder.

Ian Poulter and Justin Rose suffered to varying degrees on the final few holes to fall back into a tie for fourth on one-over, five behind the world No 1, who is the only player under par.

Of course, there remains rich and tantalising opportunity, as there does for Tommy Fleetwood on the same mark after a brilliant 66, one behind two other Americans in Scott Piercy and Charley Hoffman on level par. But still, the late struggles or Poulter and Rose were demoralising, especially for the former.

Indeed, Poulter’s triple-bogey on the eighth (his 17th) can be classed a mini disaster. On the fairway from his drive, he found a bunker and then hacked around in the rough before holing out for a seven.

Having birdied three of the preceding four holes to close to within one of Johnson, it was the last thing the 42-year-old expected, particularly as the wind had dipped and Shinnecock Hills at last turned from merciless into (almost) charitable. Instead, in his frustration he bogeyed his last hole for a 73.

“Maybe it makes a few people happy out there that, you know, we kind of mess up just like everyone else,” Poulter said. “We're human, right? We make mistakes. The best outcome for me is to put it out of my mind and look at the position I'm in for this weekend. I just need to make sure I don't make any silly mistakes.”

Rose, meanwhile, bogeyed his last two holes for a 70. “I would have taken this if you’d offered it to me,” Rose said, mindful he would replace Johnson at the top of the rankings should he win his second US Open. “Bogeying the last two is not good anywhere, but I’ve just seen what happened to Ian and that’s what can happen on this course. Dustin is only one hole away from putting us all back in it and that’s how you must think.”

What makes this mindset easier for Rose to adopt is that he has overhauled Johnson recently. Nine months ago at the World Golf Championship event in China he was eight behind the languid American going into the final round - and won. Johnson is far from the unflappable front-runner.

Fleetwood should take heart from that as well. The 27-year-old from Southport restated his comfort in this tournament and indeed in golf’s biggest arenas with the lowest round of the week so far, a 66 later matched by Brooks Koepka, the defending champion who is also one-over, as is the Swede Henrik Stenson.

Fleetwood reeled off seven birdies on another tricky morning. During the morning, the rain fell and the temperature dipped and the mission was again to hang on. But the world no 12 had other ideas, feeding off his fourth place finish from 12 months ago, and making impressive strides up the leaderboard. In a fine championship for England, Matt Fitzpatrick is also in the top 12 on three-over after a 70.

However, Johnson is out there alone and is the overwhelming favourite to win his second US Open in three years. The 33-year-old will have to create history if he is to do so as nobody has ever won the US Open after lifting a title the week before.  Yet that will not concern Johnson one iota. He does not flinch, does not agitate and that is why he is the perfect fit for an examination so arduous.

The conditions in Memphis last week were soft and benign and this test could not be more different.  Johnson is showing the rest that if you are good enough, you can and will adapt - both your game and your mindset. From firing at eagles to fighting for pars.

There was the occasional cue for the galleries to cheer – most notably the 45-footer for birdie on the par three seventh – but otherwise this 67 was memorable for having only one bogey on his card.

“It was another really solid round,” Johnson said. “I like having the lead for sure - it's fewer shots you have to make up.  I usually sleep well, whatever, but there's a lot of golf to go. I'm in and I'm just to go out there and stick to my gameplan. It's worked so far."

Certainly playing partner Tiger Woods was impressed. “Dustin was in complete control,” Woods said. “He's hitting the ball so flush. It's windy, it's blustery, it was raining early, but he's hitting right through it. And he's got beautiful speed on the greens. Every putt looked like it was going to go in.”

On his own performance, Woods was not at all pleased. There were a few late birdies in his 72 as his misfiring putter at last consented to locate the hole, but they were not about to bring consolation as he missed the cut. “I'm not very happy the way I played and the way I putted. I don't know that you can be too happy and too excited about 10-over,” Woods said.

The innocuous first hole was particularly vexing. On both days he hit the fairway and on both days he became spectacularly unstuck. After the triple-bogey on Thursday, he double-bogeyed it this time after missing the green on the right. That is five shots dropped, right there.

When asked whether he believes he can win a US Open he replied: “Absolutely”. He was pressed why. “Have you seen how I’ve been swinging it?” Woods did not swing it well here, missing more than half of the greens in regulation.

Rory McIlroy joined Woods in the premature exit, also on 10-over. The Ulsterman shot a 70, 10 shots better than Thursday, but there were four birdies in the last eight holes and he never genuinely challenged to make the cut.  

His pain was shared by playing partner Spieth, who bogeyed the last two holes to miss out by one on nine-over. Spieth’s disgusted expression said it all.

