Facebook bans gun-accessory adverts for children

Facebook will stop showing children adverts for gun accessories as part of a policy update, reportedly to try to reduce gun violence in the US following a number of school shootings. 

Currently, any user on Facebook can see adverts for a full range of gun attachments, including scopes, holsters and gun-mounted lights.

But from June 21 the social media giant will block underage users from seeing the posts.

According to tech news website the Verge, the decision was linked to a renewed focus on gun violence in America after a number of school shootings.

Last month, ten people were shot dead and 10 others injured after gunman Dimitrios Pagourtzis opened fire inside a high school near Houston, Texas.

The 17-year-old shooter had previously posted pictures of guns to Instagram, a picture sharing site that is owned by Facebook.

The incident had the highest number of fatalities at a school shooting since the massacre in February at Marjorie Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, when 17 people were killed.

A Facebook spokesmen said the decision followed a "regular review" of its policies, which will change to require sellers to “restrict their audiences to at least 18 years of age or over”.

The company, headed up by Mark Zuckerberg, said that sales of weapons, ammunitions, explosives and magazines were already restricted on its network, as were those that helped people modify guns.

It already prohibits the advertising of guns and gun modifications, like silencers and magazines.

Timeline | US school shootings in 2018
The deadly gun rampage at a Florida high school took to 18 the number of school shootings across the United States so far this year

St Johns, January 3
A 31-year-old man died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound at East Olive Elementary School in Michigan.

Seattle, January 4
A gunshot was fired at the New Start High School in Washington state. The bullet entered an office window. No one was hurt.

Sierra Vista, January 10
A teen was found dead from a self-inflicted gunshot wound in a bathroom at Coronado Elementary School in Arizona.

San Bernardino, January 10
At least one shot was fired, shattering a California State University classroom window. There were no injuries.

Denison, January 10
A bullet was accidentally fired through a classroom wall at the Grayson College Criminal Justice Centre in Texas. No one was hurt.

Marshall, January 15
A bullet went through a residential hall’s dorm room at the Wiley College Campus in Texas. No injuries were reported.

Winston-Salem, January 20
A state university football player was shot and killed at an event at Wake Forest University.

Italy, January 22
A teenage girl was wounded at Italy High school in Texas after a 16-year-old suspect opened fire with a semi-automatic handgun.

Gentilly, January 22
A shooting outside The NET Charter High School in Louisiana injured a 14-year-old boy.

Benton, January 23
Two people were killed and another 15 were shot at Marshall County High School in Kansas.

Mobile, January 25
Student Jonah Neal fired a gun on campus at Murphy High School in Alabama. No one was injured.

Dearborn, January 26
Shots were fired from a car in Dearborn High School's car park in Michigan. No injuries were reported.

Philadelphia, January 31
Gunshots erupted as a fight broke out outside of Lincoln High School. A 32-year-old man was shot twice and later pronounced dead.

Los Angeles, February 1
An accidental shooting injured five children at the Salvador B. Castro Middle School.

Oxon Hill, February 5
A teen was shot outside of Oxon Hill High School in Maryland. The victim survived.

Maplewood, February 5
A third-grader pulled the trigger on an officer's gun, firing a shot at the Harmony Learning Centre in Minnesota. No one was hurt.

New York, February 8
A teenager was taken into custody after a shot was fired inside Metropolitan High School. No one was hurt.

Parkland, February 14
A 19-year-old gunman returned to a Florida high school where he had once been expelled for disciplinary reasons and opened fire with an assault-style rifle, killing 17 people before he was arrested by police.

Facebook has also recently announced plans to improve the way people were told about how they were being targeted for adverts in the wake of the Cambridge Analytica scandal.

From July 2, users will be informed when an advertiser has used a data broker, a company that collects and sells customer data to allow better advert targeting.

A Facebook spokesperson told the Telegraph: “We regularly review our policies to identify areas where we can improve. As part of these efforts, we’ve decided to make some changes to the way in which weapons accessories are advertised on Facebook.

“Unlike posts from friends or Pages, ads receive paid distribution. This means we have an even higher standard for what is allowed and why we have chosen to limit weapons accessories to an adults only audience.

“In the weeks ahead, we will be working with businesses and organisations who may be affected by the policy to ensure they know about them and make the appropriate changes.”
