The new Sims mobile game is addicting as hell (and this is a cry for help)
Remember The Sims? It's that game where you lived, laughed, loved, and lost across multiple generations and lifetimes — but in reality were just sitting in front of a computer screen for 14 hours.
Yeah, well, now all of that has been streamlined into a mobile game. And if you're thinking, "Dear god, but I have a life now, I cannot go down this path again," you are correct. An on-the-go version of The Sims is exactly as diabolically addicting as it sounds.
Not to be confused with The Sims FreePlay, The Sims Mobile feels like a truer and more robust spin-off of the classic computer game. Created by EA and Maxis (as opposed to Freeplay's Firemonkeys), it converts all the traditional elements of the main series into a free-to-play model.
While "free-to-play" is usually enough to send people running for the hills, The Sims Mobiledoes the usual tricks (like limited energy) in a pretty balanced way that doesn't corner you into paying.
More importantly, porting the series to such an accessible format amplifies its most important legacy: making people who don't fit the traditional definition of "gamer" feel invited to play.
That's how comedian, former Daily Show host, and podcast Queen Jessica Williams began her lifelong love for the game, at least. 
"I thought for a while that video game were for boys. But with The Sims, I realized that really there's video games for everybody," Williams said, recalling her early days of playing the first-ever generation of Sims game. "It's just such a fun concept — but also it's body-positive, sexuality positive."
If the numbers given to Mashable by EA are any indication, mobile users are hungry for on-the-go Sims experiences. The first mobile iteration of the game, launched in 2011, garnered "358 million unique lifetime players and continues to this day to see more than 11 million unique monthly players." At the time of this article's publication, the newer Sims Mobile was still topping iTunes' top 10 free apps.
And today, like many other Sims players, Williams may not be into shooting games, but the series has inspired her to become a hardcore fan of strategy, simulation, and story-based genres.
As a lifetime fan and celebrity spokesperson for The Sims, Williams chatted with us about her well-known love for the series over the phone. While she hadn't played the mobile game yet, living the Sims life over the years has taught her some valuable lessons on how to know when you're doing it right — and wrong.
"I feel like the way you play The Sims is pretty reflective of your life," she said. "A lot of the times I'll throw my Sim into a career, just full throttle. Then I'll realize I'm not having fun because I'm achieving, achieving, achieving. It reminds me of my life way too much. It's way too real."
Williams' own career has certainly been skyrocketing over the past year: She's done everything from starring in her own Netflix Original to landing HBO specials based on her beloved Two Dope Queens podcast and even making a cameo in the upcoming Fantastic Beasts 2.
Her Sims come along for the ride through all her career goal achievements IRL. But The Simsis also a place where she can put her work ethic (and morals) to the side for a hot second. 
"I'm definitely a cheater — I'm using all those cheat codes. Life's too hard in the real world to not just type in motherlode and get, like, 40000 Simoleons. Life's too short," she said.
She had some diabolical fun making an Anna Wintour Sim, too. (She kept her version of the editor imbued with the personality traits of kleptomania and a love for drama.)
When Williams got to visit what she calls the IRL "Sim Factory" (AKA Maxis HQ in Redwood Shores), she asked them a very important question: "What's the first thing most players do?" The response? "They were like, 'Oh, they make out with everybody.' I mean, you gotta Woo-Hoo it. If you're not Woo-Hooing, you ain't playing it right."
Now if that's not salient advice for life, whether computer-generated or not, we don't know what is.
You can download The Sims Mobile for free on iOS and Android devices.