SURVIVOR’S STORY Drug addict shares incredible before and after pics after ‘turning his life around and going clean for two years’

A man shared pictures of how he transformed himself having given up drugs after overdosing on PCP on Reddit and has received hundreds of positive comments

A DRUG addict has shared incredible before and after pics after he says he turned his life around and kicked the habit for two years.

The unnamed man posted the images on Reddit, sharing his story and saying he's "the luckiest man to walk the earth".

The first shows his police mugshot with the man looking dirty and extremely unkempt with a badly scarred face.

The second is the same man two years later having served time and cleaned his act up.

He captioned the pictures: “My mugshot from two years ago following a massive PCP/benzo overdose and before homelessness and a trip to prison. I'm now two years sober, living a wonderful life and happier than I ever thought I'd be!”

More than 1,000 people commented on the post, which also got 44,100 upvotes.

Responding to one commentator, the man replied: “thanks man! The support i get from those who have seen where i've been and where i'm at is nothing short of incredible.

“I should post my story sometime- enjoyed a decade of heavy drug use, lost a leg to a shotgun accident, did some time in state prison, lived under a bridge, lost everything I ever owned, alienated my loved ones yet somehow I'm still here.

“Successful, content and surrounded by people who truly love me. I am without a doubt the luckiest man to walk the earth.”

crossfire
The man has been inundated with good wishes and positive comments, with many also encouraging him to write a book about his experiences.

One wrote: “I hope you were able to reconnect with your loved ones. Good luck man!”

Another said: “All i'm saying is that you should write a book, because i would for sure read it.”

A third wrote: “I'm so proud of you. I'm a recovering alcoholic and have hit rock bottom once or twice myself. Well done on your progress, you are truly inspirational and I wish you all the luck, happiness and love in the world as you continue your journey.”

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6703745/reddit-drug-addict-before-after-pictures/