Isle of Wight Festival, review – too much Depeche Mode, not enough Liam Gallagher 

By Tristram Fane Saunders

25 June 2018 5:15pm 

For three years from 1968-70, the Isle of Wight was the world’s greatest rock festival, drawing crowds of half a million to see Bob Dylan, Jimi Hendrix and The Who – until an act of parliament shut it down in 1971. The new version only dates back to 2002, but claims a spiritual link to the original, allowing it to celebrate 2018 as a 50th anniversary. In a fallow year for Glastonbury, this was the smaller festival’s chance to challenge its throne.

Did it pull it off? Not quite. It was clean, well organised and blessed with dazzling sunshine, but the anniversary shindig was reassuringly solid rather than genuinely exciting. With weekend tickets costing around £200, Isle of Wight has a noticeably thinner line-up than comparably priced festivals; venture beyond the main stage and there's little to draw punters’ interest, though 2017 Britain’s Got Talent winner Tokio Myers did manage to pack out the Big Top tent with his high-energy mix of drum-and-bass and classically influenced piano riffs. 

Meanwhile, the choice of headliners could be seen as either revisiting former glories or retreading the same beery old ground. The laddish Kasabian, who topped the bill here in 2011, were back with an enjoyable set of stomp-along hits on Friday night, while 2013 headliners The Killers brought the weekend to a close on Sunday with their usual Las Vegas polish. They arrived in an explosion of pink glitter to their new single The Man, and bowed out with the decade-defining indie anthem Mr Brightside, Brandon Flowers’s pristine vocals barely overpowering the roar of the crowd.
Brandon Flowers onstage with The Killers



Liam Gallagher and Depeche Mode were supposedly co-headlining Saturday on an equal footing, but the timetable suggested otherwise. Gallagher had just 60 minutes to give the crowd what they wanted, and did exactly that. You always know what you’re getting with the Oasis frontman: a parka, a pout, a bit of tambourine-waggling and some of the most recognisable vocals in rock. Though he made space for Wall of Glass, the standout single from last year's solo album As You Were, his set was rightly dominated by Oasis hits, opening with Rock’n’Roll Star (“there’s not many of them left”, he mused), and closing with a rushed one-two punch of Live Forever and Wonderwall.

While Gallagher was strapped for time, Depeche Mode had almost two hours and no idea how to fill it. Any Oasis fans who had stuck around were rewarded to a set of uninvolving synth melancholia that saved all the hits till the end, driving away all but the most devoted. The band rarely make festival appearances, and it shows. Despite frontman Dave Gahan’s slithery charisma, when he crooned “we feel nothing inside” on their opening song (2017’s Going Backwards) the feeling was mutual. By the time they reached Eighties classic Everything Counts, many had already wandered off in search of a party – and found it in the next tent, where Hacienda Classical were tuning up. Acid house, accompanied by a full orchestra? A winning combination.



For sheer danceability, though, Nigel Rodgers and Chic may be the perfect festival band. The 65-year-old guitarist and producer, who spoke movingly about his recent battle with cancer, has had a hand in writing several generations’ worth of floor-fillers: Diana Ross’s I’m Coming Out, David Bowie’s Let’s Dance and Daft Punk’s Get Lucky were all filtered through Chic’s distinctive funk-soul sound on Friday, and each one proved utterly irresistible.

The same could not be said for Rita Ora. The chart-topping pop star leaned heavily on her backing track’s pre-recorded vocals; only chipping in with the odd word would have been forgivable in a show with more spectacle, but her dancers’ lacklustre choreography could have been cobbled together in 15 minutes backstage. To see how it’s really done, she should have been watching Jessie J, who in a revelatory performance unexpectedly reinvented herself as a bona fide rock star. Her breakthrough hit Pricetag has always had a whiff of the novelty single about it, but for this festival it was rearranged into a guitar-heavy monster, anchored by the virtuoso pop vocals that led her to victory on China’s equivalent of The X Factor earlier this year.

The festival's muddy past was celebrated in a mini-exhibition of photographs from the 1970 event, in a small tent at the outskirts of the main arena. There I met Tony, an islander who had moved here in 1969, drawn by the pull of rock'n'roll. “It’s nothing like that today,” he sighed, gesturing to a crowd photo where he was one dot among thousands. “It’s so commercial. Back then, there was maybe a single hotdog stand. Now look at it.”

And, indeed, the 2018 version had dozens of stalls selling frankfurters for £8 a piece, while punters with more money than sense could pay £8,000 for a posh tent in the Camp Kerala enclosure, or even arrive by helicopter (a trip made slightly less expensive by Flyt, a company promoting itself as “Uber for helicopters”). But this new iteration of the festival also tries to give something back to the island, offering discounts for islanders and showcasing local bands on its smaller stages.

One clear tie to the festival’s glory days came from rock’s perennial nearly-men The Pretty Things, who played here 1968 and were back to celebrate the 50th anniversary of their rock opera SF Sorrow, a clear influence on The Who’s Tommy. Now 73, lead singer Phil May took a while to warm up, but guitarist Dick Taylor – an original Rolling Stones member, until he quit in 1962 – was as sharp as ever. Will any of 2018's acts will have the same staying-power? I'm not so sure.

