THAT'S ASDA PRICE Shopper banned from every Asda store in UK after row over £2 fabric conditioner

Mulkh Chumber, 53, wanted to buy ten bottles of Comfort Creations after Asda placed an ad in The Sun

A SHOPPER has been banned from every Asda in the UK after a row over the price of fabric softener.

Mulkh Chumber, 53, went to buy ten bottles of Comfort Creations after the supermarket's advert in The Sun promised it for £1 a bottle instead of £3

Mr Chumber was stunned when he got to the checkout and was told it really cost £2 a bottle.

He says staff called the police on him because he refused to leave without his bargain laundry products.

Cops said they will take no action - but Asda said he is not allowed in any store in the whole of Britain, claiming he was "abusive".

Mr Chumber, a newsagent of Basford, Staffs, said: “Asda security staff handed me a letter saying I am banned from every single Asda in the UK and I was shocked. It is not fair.

“If something is advertised at a certain price then you should give it to the customer at that price.

"I used to go to Asda three or four times a week and have never had any problems before.

"I can do without them and go to Morrisons instead.”

He said after the wrong price came up at the checkout he went to the customer service desk where staff said again the fabric softener was £2.

He said: "I showed her the advert, which stated they were £1, and she said it was subject to availability, even though the shelves were full.

“Then I was told it was selected stores only. But they could not tell me where the offer was available, and I was told I would have to put them back.

“I said I didn’t go to the store to waste my time putting the items in the trolley and then putting them back and then I've wasted petrol going to the store and back.

"The Asda staff called security and they told me they would call the police if I did not leave.

"I did not leave, the police arrived and I spent half an hour with them explaining the situation."

Staffordshire police confirmed they were called to Wolstanton Retail Park on June 15.

The force said: "We were called to reports of a man being abusive to staff. The man, in his 50s, was spoken to by officers at the supermarket."

Asda said: “We would have honoured the advertised deal, but do not tolerate abusive behaviour towards colleagues.”

Last month shopper Andrew Gregory was banned from a nearby Asda in Tunstall after he complained about the toilets.

In 2016 mum-of-two Natasha Hamlin was banned from all UK Asda stores, meaning she could not spend a £142 voucher she was given as a refund moments earlier.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6694675/asda-bans-shopper-every-uk-store/