Portugal Fights Off Iran to Advance in World Cup
By VICTOR MATHER
JUNE 25, 2018

After controlling most of the game, Portugal sweated out some late nervous moments before advancing to the second round of the World Cup with a 1-1 draw against Iran in Saransk on Monday.
On paper, this game was all Portugal. It completed 508 passes to Iran’s 131, for example. But after Ricardo Quaresma put a beautiful shot in the upper corner late in the first half, Portugal could not add to its total.
Its best chance came early in the second half when Ronaldo was awarded a penalty by the video assistant. But his shot at ground level was saved by Iran keeper Alireza Beiranvand.

Ronaldo has now missed six of his last 14 penalty kicks, but he wasn’t the only big star to miss one in this tournament. Argentina forward Lionel Messi also was denied in his team’s opening draw against Iceland.

Three minutes deep into injury time, Iran got a surprise equalizer, again on a video-reviewed penalty. Sardar Azmoun knocked a ball down with his head, and it struck the arm of Cedric Soares. This type of incidental contact is almost never called a penalty, but this time it was. Karim Ansarifard put the penalty in the top of the net, and the score was tied at 1-1.

Continue reading the main story
Iran was still on its way out of the World Cup, but one more improbable goal in the last seconds would have changed that. And with 95 minutes gone, Mehdi Taremi got the ball in the box, but he put it in the side netting. Portugal survived.

Because Spain tied its game against Morocco by 2-2, it won the group on goals scored and earned a round of 16 a game with host Russia. Portugal will have to play Luis Suarez, Edinson Cavani and a tough Uruguay squad in the next round instead.

[Here’s what happened in the other Group B game, Spain vs. Morocco]

Here’s how Portugal and Iran tied:

FULL TIME: Portugal 1, Iran 1
Portugal advanced to the second round of the World Cup after a 1-1 draw with Iran in Saransk on Monday. Iran got a late equalizer after a borderline penalty call on review, but couldn’t find one more goal in the last minutes.

90’ +6: Another Yellow for Portugal
The referee Enrique Caceres gave a yellow card to Cedric Soares for some unsportsmanlike behavior after the match was already over.

90’ + 5: Another Scare for Portugal
Almost another! Mehdi Taremi got the ball in the box but put it in the side netting. Incredibly, that goal would have eliminated Cristiano Ronaldo and Portugal!

90’ + 3: GOAL! 1-1!
Karim Ansarifard put the penalty in the top of the net and Iran pull off an improbable draw. But it looks like it won’t be enough because Spain is 2-2 against Morocco.

90’ +1: Hand Ball! Penalty!
The video review finds Cedric Soares guilty. Iran can tie it with a penalty kick!

90’: Tick-Tock
Time running out on Iran. There’s currently an extended dispute over a possible handball by Portugal.

88:’ Iran Stands Firm on Free Kick
Portugal gets a midrange free kick, but Alireza Beiranvand did a nice job of taking it away with his head.

87’: Portugal Loses Another One
Another offensive push made by Portugal, but this one ends up lost on a bad pass by Cedric Soares.

87’: Iran Needs More Help
As it stands, Iran is in real trouble. Even if it equalizes, and even though Spain is trailing Morocco, 2-1, it would be eliminated on a tiebreaker of goals scored. Iran must score AND hope Morocco scores again.

83’: Yellow for Ronaldo
Ronaldo reaches around Pouraliganji and pulls him down while making contact with his face. It wasn’t in the penalty area, but the video assistant is taking a look anyway. Ronaldo is found guilty. Yellow card. Ronaldo did make contact with the face, but the video also showed that Pouraliganji made the most of his fall.

77’: Adrien Silva Still Firing
While Ronaldo scuffles on the turf with an Iran defender, Andre Silva decides to take another shot from distance. Same result: high and wide.

75’: Iran Appeals for Fouls
Two different Iran players hit the turf and appeal for a foul, one inside the box and one out. Maybe get your story straight guys.

73’: Iran Puts a Scare in Portugal
Shot for Iran by substitute Ghoddos. Just wide. If that had been on target, it might have gone in, because the keeper was a little late diving.

72’: Adrien Silva Takes One
Adrien Silva’s shot from distance goes well over for Portugal. Ronaldo’s gesture of exasperation seems to say: “I was open in the box.” He was too.

70’: Bernardo Silva On for Portugal
That’s going to be it for Quaresma. Bernardo Silva checks in for him.

66’: Ronaldo Misses
Ronaldo’s not getting many good opportunities here, but he takes a shot near the edge of the box. Wide right.

65’: Getting Physical Here
This game is breaking down a bit. Iran is not showing much ability to get the ball away from Portugal. And both tams are showing a willingness to fall to the turf and wave their hands in appeal.

64’: Quaresma Does Some Acting
Portugal’s goal scorer Ricardo Quaresma goes down, grabbing his face. Iran takes exception, accusing him of “simulation,” and indeed replays do not show any obvious facial contact.

62’: Guerreirro Tests Iran
Raphael Guerreiro goes for a long ball, but a defender gets in front of it. Portugal now leads the possession battle, 69-31.

59’: Iran Gets Another Chance
A good Iran cross at pitch level is booted clear by Pepe. That’s a corner, but the header off it goes sideways. Still, it was a fine minute or two for Iran, which must score at least one goal here.

56’: Substitution for Iran
Ehsan Haji Safi goes off for Milad Mohammadi. Haji Safi was booked for a yellow earlier.

54’: Yellow for Iran
Sardar Azmoun of Iran gets hot and confronts the referee. For his troubles, he receives a yellow card.

53’: Ronaldo Denied
Ronaldo tries to get his fifth goal of the World Cup. Saved! Keeper Beioranvand guessed right and collected it on the ground. Life for Iran!

52’: Penalty? Penalty!
Ronaldo goes down under a challenge by Ezatolahi. Is it a penalty? The video assistant is called in ... penalty!

50’: Portugal Gets Possession
Portugal fires up its short-passing game right away, and its possession advantage starts ticking upward. When Iran does get a touch, it tries to get the ball directly downfield, but so far Portugal has regained possession in seconds.

46’: Iran Needs Some Magic
Second half. Quaresma’s sensational strike gave Portugal a 1-0 lead. Iran is going to have to find something offensively. That’s unlikely. Iran’s odds are 5-1 to pull out a draw and 20-1 to win as of now. But good news for Iran: Four of their last five World Cup goals have come in the second half.

46’: The Numbers
This game is all Portugal: Shots, 9-3. Shots on goal, 3-1. Corners, 5-0. Possession 71-29. Passes, 366-113. Pass accuracy, 88-67. 67 percent pass accuracy for Iran. That is not a good figure at this level of play.

How Each Team Can Advance
Confused about your team’s chances to advance? We’ve got you covered. Here’s a look at what each team needs to do (or what needs to happen) to move on to the round of 16.

HALFTIME: Portugal 1, Iran 0
There are two halves of football to be played, but it looks increasingly likely that this group will end with the expected result: Portugal and Spain advancing.

45’: GOAL! Quaresma Gives Portugal 1-0 Lead
Ricardo Quaresma picks up a give-and-go just outside the penalty box and puts it in the upper corner. A perfect shot. Portugal rewarded for their play at the stroke of halftime.

42’: Another Miss for Portugal
Ricardo Quaresma misses again. He finds a stray ball inside the box but sends it wide left.

39’: Trying to Find Ronaldo
Portugal recovers and manages to keep control until Ronaldo gets the ball and finally fires from distance right at the keeper.

Portugal now leads the possession game, 72-29.

37’: Iran Keeps Pushing
Iran looks organized in putting together a string of passes in Portugal’s area, but the defense eventually ends the threat without an Iran shot.

34’: Portugal Handles Free Kick
Dangerous free kick for Iran. Jahanbakhsh curls it in to Ezatolahi. His shot is right at the keeper, but that was actually a good chance for Iran.

33’: Yellow for Guerreiro
Raphael Guerreiro chases down a forward pass and commits to a sloppy tackle. Yellow. Free kick.

32’: Fonte’s Down, Then Up
Portugal’s Jose Fonte is down for a while, but is revived by 10 seconds of an icepack to the head. That’s some icepack.

29’: Quaresma Active
Portugal controls the ball for several minutes before Ricardo Quaresma toys with Iran a little bit and then sends the ball in. It’s blocked for a corner, which Iran’s 11-man defense clears again.

26’: Patricio Recovers, Portugal Attacks
Rui Patricio is OK, and Portugal come up for another attack. Ronaldo to Andre Silva. He’s a couple of steps offsides.

24’: Patricio Goes Down
Free kick to Iran. Ramin Rezaeian launches it too high and wide. Then Iran springs/sings a counter. Keeper Rui Patricio gets to the ball before Alireza Jahanbakhsh, but takes a boot to the body in the process. He’s down for treatment.

22’: Taremi Misses Free Kick
Mehdi Taremi takes a strong free kick, but juuuust misses the post. Iran looking competent with the ball.

16’: Ronaldo Hits the Wall
After Vahid Amiri commits a foul for Iran, Ronaldo sets up for a free kick. Off the wall. Corner, cleared. It’s all Portugal though. Iran can’t get the ball out of its half.

15’: Danger in Iran’s Area
Iran’s goalkeeper Beiranvand lets a ball out of his hands and it hovers in front of net with Andre Silva right there. But it rolls away.

13’: Portugal Still Probing
A Portugal cross zips across the face of goal, but no one is there to punch it in. Portugal in charge here.

10’: Mario Sails One Over
Iran keeper Beiranvand and his defender Ezatolahi arrive at the ball at the same moment. It bounces free because of the mix up, giving Joao Mario a good chance. But he smashes it over.

8’: Iran Takes a Shot
Iran gets a decent break to the outskirts of the Portugal box, Amiri charges in and sends the ball far wide.

6’: No Call
Andre Silva gets the ball at the end line for Portugal and is brought down after defender Rezaeian barges into him from behind. Silva expresses amazement that he didn’t get a call.

2’: Ronaldo Attacks
Cristiano Ronaldo gets it started with a point-blank shot. But it’s low and Iran’s keeper Beiranvand is up to it.

1’: Early Foul

Iran’s Omid Ebrahimi commits a foul as soon as Portugal crosses midfield. Enrique Caceres with the call.

Kickoff!
Portugal in red. Iran in white. Should Iran pull off the upset, it will advance past the first round for the first time in its fifth appearance at a World Cup.

Portugal’s Strength
It’ll take something special for Iran to win today. Fernando Santos’s Portugal squad have won 10 of their last 11 World Cup games, Cristiano Ronaldo has already scored four goals and the team is motivated by a need to win. Meanwhile, Iran has only TAKEN two shots on goal this tournament.

How do World Cup Tie-Breakers Work?
If Spain and Portugal both win, as is expected, they will both advance. But which one will win the group? The tiebreakers go like this.

1. Whichever team wins by a bigger margin.

2. If the margins are the same, whichever team scores more goals.

But what if the teams win with the same score, 1-0, say, or 3-1? In that case the tiebreaker will be fewest yellow cards in the tournament. Spain currently has one yellow, to Portugal’s two. If that category winds up tied as well, a coin will be tossed. The result matters: the group runner-up must play Uruguay, while the group winner gets Russia.

Ronaldo Loses Some Sleep
Iran fans threw a big noisy party last night. In an incredible coincidence, the party was held directly outside the hotel where the Portuguese players were staying. The ruckus was so bothersome that Ronaldo himself emerged on a balcony to ask for quiet. While some fans reportedly left in response, more arrived and the noise continued.
