'BARBARIC' Home Secretary slams ‘inhumane’ Putin for ‘reckless and callous’ use of Novichok on Britain’s streets as couple fight for life after contact with deadly poison

Earlier the Security Minister called on Vladimir Putin to tell Britain how his forces carried out the attempted hit on Sergei Skripal

THE Home Secretary today blasted the "barbaric and inhumane" Russian government for deploying the deadly nerve agent Novichok on Britain's streets.

Sajid Javid said Vladimir Putin's regime had been "reckless and callous" - as he officially confirmed that the poison used to target ex-spy Sergei Skripal is responsible for putting a British couple in hospital this week.

Dawn Sturgess and Charlie Rowley are fighting for their lives after they stumbled across a discarded container in Amesbury which is thought to have carried Novichok.

Speaking in the Commons today, Mr Javid said:"The use of chemical weapons anywhere is barbaric and inhumane.

"The decision taken by the Russian government to deploy these in Salisbury on March 4 was reckless and callous.

"There is no plausible alternative explanation to the events in March other than the Russian state was responsible."

He added: "The eyes of the world are now on Russia, not least because of the World Cup - it's now time that the Russian government comes forward and explains exactly what's gone on.

"It is completely unacceptable for our people to be either deliberate or accidental targets, or for our streets, our parks, our towns, to be dumping grounds for poison."

The Home Secretary briefed MPs on the investigation shortly after chairing an emergency Cobra meeting of security bosses and ministers including the Foreign Secretary and Defence Secretary.

He confirmed the Novichok which poisoned Mr Rowley and Ms Sturgess is the same substance which almost killed Mr Skripal and his daughter Yulia.

But Mr Javid added that it's not yet possible to say whether or not the nerve agent comes from the exact same batch as the one used against the Skripals.

Revealing there are 100 counter-terror cops on the case, he said: "We have taken a very robust approach to decontamination and there is no evidence that either the man or the woman in hospital visited any of the places that were visited by the Skripals."

The Home Secretary refused to rule out further measures against Russia, saying the Government will assess whether to repeat the expulsion of spies as happened in the wake of the initial Novichok attack.

What we know so far

Charlie Rowley, 45, and Dawn Sturgess, 44, were found unconscious at a property on Muggleton Road, Amesbury on Saturday
Both are fighting for their lives at Salisbury District Hospital and receiving treatment for exposure to Novichok
Police have cordoned off a number of locations, including - Muggleton Road, Amesbury; John Baker House, Salisbury; Amesbury Baptist Centre church; Boots Pharmacy in Amesbury town centre and Queen Elizabeth Gardens in Salisbury
It is feared the couple may have stumbled across a discarded syringe or container used to carry the nerve agent used on ex-Russian spy Sergei Skripal

Earlier, Security Minister Ben Wallace demanded the Russian authorities get in touch to explain exactly how they carried out the attempted hit on Mr Skripal.

And he blasted the country's officials for mocking the near-fatal attack in Salisbury - instead of helping reduce the damage.

Despite the latest incident, Theresa May urged local residents not to panic, saying: "The message from Salisbury is clear - it is very much open for business. The Government will continue to provide every support to the local community."

She also praised the "fortitude, patience and resilience" of locals who've been forced to go through multiple police investigations, and thanked emergency service workers for their efforts.

Mr Wallace today confirmed that the poisoning is not believed to be the result of a new attack on Britain.

He said: "The working assumption would be that these were victims of either the consequences of the previous attack or something else, but not that they were directly targeted."

The minister described the use of Novichok as "brazen and reckless", adding: "That is part of the anger I feel towards the Russian state."

He continued: "The Russian state could put this wrong right, they could tell us what happened, what they did, and fill in some of the significant gaps we are trying to pursue.

"I'm waiting for the phone call from the Russian state.

"This is a state that has publicly ridiculed almost everything we've said, almost comedian-wise.

"They are the one who could fill in all the clues to keep people safe."

The minister - a deputy to Mr Javid - insisted the Government will find out all the details of the Russian attack, but admitted: "It may take years."

He added that there is "low risk" to the public from the latest incident but urged locals in Amesbury and Salisbury to take precautions.

Parts of both towns have been roped off by police as they investigate how Mr Sturgess and Ms Rowley were exposed to Novichok.

Salisbury MP John Glen has also blasted Russia for putting British people in danger from the nerve agent.

He said today: "The way it was administered was outrageous and the way it was administered was totally irresponsible and reckless, and hence we are in a situation where we cannot answer some of the questions because I don't know who did it, how they did it and where they went before and after they did it.

group
"What I am given to understand is that before this reached the public domain Russian sources were aware of what was going on and there was interesting stories from Russia being planted.

"It is quite clear to me that the core roots of these two incidents lie with Russia. They are denying that and seeking to use it for propaganda."

Tory MP Bob Seely, an expert on Russian foreign policy, added: "If this is the leftovers of the Skripal poisoning, it shows a disregard for the safety of others and a lack of professionalism on the part of those people who conducted the poisoning."

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6701213/russian-state-should-finally-reveal-details-of-novichok-attack-to-stop-more-brits-getting-poisoned-security-minister-warns/