POISON PROBE Who is Sergei Skripal, was Novichok the nerve agent used to poison the former Russian spy and what was the Salisbury incident?

Skripal was once accused of sharing classified information with the UK's intelligence agency, MI6

FORMER Russian double agent Sergei Skripal was released from hospital in May after being struck down by a suspected nerve gas attack in Salisbury.

It was feared that Mr Skripal, who was convicted in his home country for selling secrets to MI6, was singled out for a state-sponsored assassination plot.

Sergei Skripal was born on June 23, 1951.

He was a Russian officer who was convicted in 2006 of spying for the United Kingdom.

Skripal was accused by Russian prosecutors of working for MI6 in the late 1990s and passing secrets to the British using a James Bond-style spy rock.

At the time, he was serving in the Russian Ground Forces and was nicknamed 'the Spy with the Louis Vuitton bag'.

What happened to Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia?
The ex-KGB spy and his daughter Yulia, 33, were exposed to a nerve agent and fell gravely ill while out in Salisbury on Sunday, March 5.

They were found slumped on a bench in a "catatonic state" and anti-terror police are investigating how the poisoning was carried out.

Russia has denied that their special services were involved and a diplomatic spat is ongoing between the UK and the Russian Federation.

Police believe the pair were exposed to the nerve agent after it was left on the front door of his home.

Traces of nerve agent were found at a number of other spots at lower concentrations.

Counter-terrorism officers said the highest concentration of nerve agent was found on the front door of Skripal's home address.

Sergei's wife Liudmila died from cancer in 2012 and in the last two years he lost his older brother and his 43-year-old son Alexandr.

And his son Alexandr was said to have died from liver failure on holiday in St Petersburg last year.

Have the suspects been found?
No one has been arrested or charged for the suspected assassination attempt as yet.

But on July 2, Scotland Yard revealed a two-man team may have been behind the Salisbury attack.

The pair are thought to have left the UK the morning after and could now be back in Russia under the protection of Vladimir Putin.

Sources last night said investigators were determined to bring a criminal case against those responsible.

What did the Chemical Watchdog say?
Independent chemicals weapons scientists have confirmed that "high purity" Novichok was used to poison Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia.

Experts from the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) carried out tests that confirmed the nerve agent was found in environmental samples collected in Salisbury.

Blood tests also confirmed that the same chemical was found in blood samples taken from the Skripals and Detective Sergeant Nick Bailey - the police officer who first attended the scene.

According to the OPCW report, the chemical was of "high purity" with a complete absence of contaminants.

Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson has described the results as "conclusive".

What are Sergei and Yulia's latest medical conditions?
Yulia Skripal is now out of hospital and under armed guard to avoid another assassination bid, The Sun learned.

Yulia has recovered well from last month’s poisoning and released a statement asking the media to respect her privacy.

Her father Sergei was discharged on May 18 after two months in hospital and may be able to provide clues to her would-be assassin.

A source said of Yulia: "She is in hospital on a military base for her own protection and to monitor her health.

"The effects of this nerve gas are unknown and could resurrect themselves at any point."

Sergei and Yulia had round-the-clock treatment at Salisbury District Hospital after collapsing on a park bench.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/5732435/sergei-skripal-russian-spy-poison-novichok-nerve-agent-salisbury/