HEALTH WARNING Warning over frozen sweetcorn as 9 die of rare disease listeriosis including two Brits since 2015

The Food Standards Agency said frozen sweetcorn is believed to be behind the outbreak of listeriosis, a rare illness that can cause serious health risks

HEALTH experts are warning about the dangers of eating frozen vegetables after nearly a dozen cases of people in the UK falling ill, including two who died.

The Food Standards Agency (FSA) said frozen sweetcorn that is not being thoroughly cooked by consumers is believed to be behind the outbreak of listeriosis, a rare illness that can cause serious health risks.

So far 11 people in the UK have been affected by listeriosis dating back to 2015, with dozens more in four other countries across Europe.

The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), which also warned about eating uncooked frozen products including spinach and green beans, said nine of those cases resulted in death, with both cases in the UK last year ending in the patient's death.

A freezing plant in Hungary is thought to be the source of contamination, with two of the 11 UK cases showing patients consumed the same brand of frozen corn from the same UK supermarket known to be supplied by Hungary.

Dr Kathie Grant from Public Health England said: "Most people won't have any symptoms of the infection or will only experience mild symptoms such as vomiting and diarrhoea, which usually pass within a few days without the need for treatment.

"More serious infection can develop in those with weakened immune systems or in vulnerable groups including babies, the elderly or pregnant women.

"The best way to prevent listeriosis is to practise good food hygiene.

"Along with the FSA, FSS (Food Standards Scotland) and HPS (Health Protection Scotland), we are reminding people that most frozen vegetables, including sweetcorn, need to be cooked before eating.

"This includes if adding them to salads, smoothies or dips."

gum


The EFSA said the extent of the outbreak had initially been underestimated, and recent cases showed it was continuing.

Its report added: "It is strongly recommended that the processing plant concerned is completely cleaned and disinfected, which involves dismantling and thoroughly cleaning and disinfecting all the plant equipment, as well as any additional surfaces that may represent a point of contamination."

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6698091/listeriosis-warning-frozen-sweetcorn-uk/