Where the cool kids go in Berlin
Berlin has been the cultural, political and economic centre of Germany since the 13th Century, making it one of Europe’s most significant and storied travel destinations. Today, travellers flock to Berlin for its art scene and nightlife, and also to experience the site of historic moments that changed the course of human history, from World War II to the Cold War to the fall of the Berlin Wall. 
When you’re travellling to Berlin, there are must do’s on everyone’s list — like the East Side Gallery — but there are also plenty of off-the-beaten-path gems that will inspire even the most experienced travellers. 
We’ve rounded up some of the best spots to visit in Berlin that you won’t necessarily find in your travel guide. 
WHAT TO DO
For couples: Few places in Berlin capture every historic moment in modern German history better than Teufelsberg. Once the site of Hitler’s military technology centre, Teufelsberg was also a secret listening station during the Cold War before Berliners eventually reclaimed the area following the fall of the Berlin Wall. Today, Teufelsberg’s rubble has been transformed into a tree covered green space complete with a ski slope and the abandoned buildings have been converted into works of art. 
Award-winning travel photographer Gary Arndt of Everything-Everywhere.com recommends a visit for the street art. “The site is filled with street art. Almost every available surface has been painted over, including the rooftops. Because it is an abandoned facility, no one was there to object to the art, so it proliferated rapidly,” he says. 
For business travellers: Although well known, a trip to the East Side Gallery is the perfect way for business colleagues — who tend to be strapped for time — to experience Berlin’s transformation. Converted from a portion of the Berlin Wall, the gallery showcases 105 pieces of original artwork created by an international group of artists in 1990 on the east side of the Wall to celebrate freedom. 
For families: Experiencing Berlin also means enjoying an escape to recharge and relax. For families, the former airport Tempelhofer Feld can serve as the perfect spot to get air, stretch out and even enjoy a picnic. 
Since 2008 when the airport officially closed, Tempelhofer Feld has been transformed into a large public space that includes a park and former airport hanger. People gather to barbecue, picnic, and ride bikes, and to take a break from touring.  Miss Filatelista blogger Lola Méndez shares some advice for visitors: “Be sure to pick up some famous German baked goods and beer to make a little picnic as you enjoy the sunset and make sure your bike has a light for the dark ride back to your hotel!”
For anyone on a budget: If you’re on a budget and still want to experience the best of what Berlin has to offer, attend one of the Berliner Philharmonika free Tuesday lunch concerts at 1 p.m. 
WHAT TO SEE
For couples: The Berlin Cathedral offers a beautiful backdrop for a romantic photo on Berlin’s Museum Island. The dome is one of the defining structures in Berlin’s cityscape and the intricate architecture makes for multiple Instagram-worthy  snapshots. 
For business travellers: Channel your best super spy persona and pose with a colleague on the Oberbaum Bridge. Built in 1895, the bridge connects Kreuzberg and Friedrichshain across the River Spree. At one point a Cold War border checkpoint, the bridge features fake medieval turrets which make it especially photogenic. 
For families: Street art can be as charming as it is edgy. For anyone who’s travelled to a big city before, the site of colorful and fancifully decorated animal sculptures is nothing new – but did you know that the art trend has hit Berlin in a big way? Kids will delight in finding Berlin’s very own “Buddy Bears” to take a photo with, officially becoming part of an art movement to bring art to the masses.  
For anyone on a budget: Berlin is famous for its street art, and the city even goes so far as to commission pieces. Méndez recommends going to Hackescher Markt for the best photo spots. “Although it is centrally located in Berlin it is actually quite hard to find as you have to enter through a narrow alley. The space is covered in murals, messages, and more. Apparently, artists have been leaving their mark here even before the wall fell down, which was incredibly illegal at the time.”
WHERE TO DINE
For couples: Located across the street from the Berlin Zoo, The Monkey Bar boasts a beautiful view of the zoo’s monkey exhibit and overlooks the park. This chic option is the perfect place for couples to enjoy expansive views of the city. 
For business travellers: The Facil is the perfect place to impress a business partner who enjoys fine cuisine. Boasting two Michelin stars, it sits in the centre of Berlin and serves what’s described as unconventional light fare. 
For families: Unwind with the kids after a trip to the Berlin Zoo and head to Restaurant Kneipe Giraffe. Kids can run around and enjoy a traditional kids menu that includes pasta with sauce and schnitzel with veggies. 
For anyone on a budget: Mustafa's Gemuese Kebab might be the most well-known street cart in Europe. Famous for its doner kebabs, the lines can be up to an hour long. The traditional sandwich of spiced meat with red sauce also comes in platter form with salad and rice. 
WHERE TO PARTY
For couples: Loftus Hall is known for its kitschy decor and hard-to-find location. Featuring house and techno music, it’s named after a haunted house in Ireland, which only adds to the vibe. 
For business travellers: BOO HOO is the place to go if you want to experience the newest musical acts from every genre. The club pops up tri-monthly, making it a more exciting option for locals and travellers who enjoy the buildup and excitement leading to each event.
For families: Berliners know how to party and want their kids to have just as much fun. The Berlin-Friedrichshain neighborhood features the Dragon Playground which is guarded by — you guessed it — a big, green dragon. It’s the perfect place to let the little ones blow off some steam while getting cute family photos. 
For anyone on a budget: Clubs are part of what makes Berlin’s culture so vibrant, and prices are generally fair. Originally launched in 1991, Tresor is one of the city’s iconic clubs which promises a big night on a small budget.   
WHERE TO STAY 
TRYP by Wyndham offers two locations in Berlin which can serve as an ideal base for travellers who want to explore the city. TRYP by Wyndham Berlin City East puts you at the center of Berlin’s arts and culture while offering in-hotel dining for moments when you prefer to nest. TRYP by Wyndham Berlin Mitte near Brandenburg Gate features an interior that reflects the city’s unique art and cultural vibe.