Everything you need to know about World Water Day
The stats aren't great and the future looks bleak.

More than 2 billion people lack access to safely managed drinking water. Nearly as many live in "potentially severely water-scarce areas," with that number expected to rise to 3 billion by 2050. The global population and demand for water are both skyrocketing. Meanwhile, 20 percent of the world's population is expected to live in flood-prone areas by 2050, where drinking water can be contaminated.

However, there's much we can all do to tackle the problem and the time to act is now. 
World Water Day is upon us again as a reminder of what can be done — and what's at stake. Here's everything you need to know.

What is World Water Day?
World Water Day, as you might have guessed from the title, is an international day of awareness focusing on the ongoing global water crisis. Held annually on March 22, it's now in its 25th year.

What's this year's theme?
Nature for Water — essentially an exploration of nature-based solutions to water crises worldwide. As World Water Day's site points out, many of the world's recurring water problems, like floods, drought, and water pollution, aren't just caused by climate change. Environmental damage in the form of poor soil, neglected wetlands or degraded vegetation can exacerbate the problem.

In their words: "When we neglect our ecosystems, we make it harder to provide everyone with the water we need to survive and thrive." So this year the focus is on natural solutions.

What sort of nature-based solutions?
Sand dams, for starters. These are essentially walls built into the ground that improve water storage and allow locals to draw fresh water via solar-powered pumps. Smart landscaping can also help, with plants and trees helping improve the soil, which in turn improves water retention. 
What can I do?
All sorts of things. Awareness is key, so begin by sharing this article and any World Water Day resources or factsheets. Read up on activities and success stories and follow U.N. Water on Twitter.

Beyond that, there are several practical steps you can take this World Water Day.

Follow or donate to key organizations
There are a number of companies making a difference where it counts.

Water.org, for example, brings safe, sanitary water to communities across the world through access to small and affordable loans. This ensures the supply is sustainable in the long term. Co-founded by actor Matt Damon, the charity ranks in Charity Navigator's top 10 percent of global charities for financial transparency and accountability.

This World Water Day, they're asking for a $60 donation (although any amount helps) and focusing on freeing up women from having to trek to pick up fresh water, so they can spend more time with family, working, or attending school.
Then there's charity: water, which works with organizations on the ground to provide long-lasting water solutions where they're needed most. Private donors fund their operating costs, so the nonprofit says 100 percent of your money goes toward its goal of providing clean water. So far, according to the organization, charity: water has funded more than 24,000 water projects for 7 million people globally.

View image on Twitter

This year the charity is asking for donations of $8.15, which was the amount offered by six-year-old Nora Jackson who submitted a note that said “I do not want people to die because of water.”

Getty Images, meanwhile, released a collection of images this year entitled Watermarks for Water. Any images licensed from the set result in a 10% donation to charity: water.
WaterAid is promoting the #Blue4Water campaign "in support of the 844 million people on the planet who still do not have access to clean water." It has created a filter that allows you to add a blue frame to your Facebook profile, and the organization has a bunch of fundraising tips, too.
Finally, Unicef USA is asking supporters to address the "water burden" of young women and girls this World Water Day. The organization says 88.4 percent of each dollar goes directly to help children, and just $3 can provide safe water to three children for more than two months.
Be sure to check out several other organizations working to tackle water problems in the U.S. and abroad.

Invest in innovative water startups
Whether it's drinkable books that educate on safe water tips while filtering out impurities or portable smart straws, there are a number of innovative products from smart companies working on solutions to the water crisis.

Kickstarter, meanwhile, has a host of projects that purport to help, including smart showers and a water bottle you can share with your dog.

Attend — or hold — an event
The World Water Day site has a map of events and there are things happening everywhere, from beach clean-ups to talks and other gatherings. 

World Vision, which says it’s the largest provider of clean water in the world outside of government, is hosting a global 6k run for water on May 19th.

Bring water awareness into your own life
There a number of ways you can reduce your own water consumption and avoid unnecessary wastage. We laid them out in depth here, but essentially you should:

Check your own consumption using this water footprint calculator

Fix leaky pipes — you could be losing thousands of gallons annually

Ensure appliances like your dishwasher and washing machine are full before using

Think about the water footprint of the food you eat (hint: meat-free days are your friend)

Get your shower times down to two songs. We're talking two pop, not prog, songs. About eight minutes.

Michael Phelps brushes his teeth during his shower. Learn from him. At least turn off that tap while brushing. The EPA estimates the average American family uses more than 300 gallons of water per day.

Whether it's reducing consumption or giving up some time or money, there's something everyone can do to help tackle the crisis.