Why Your Brain Tricks You Into Doing Less Important Tasks
Yet again, your brain is working against you, and it’s because of a phenomenon called the urgency effect.

Image
CreditDavid Ramos/Getty Images
By Tim Herrera
July 9, 2018

Leer en español
Here’s a list of things I did before starting this newsletter: I filled out the documents to renew my passport; clipped my cat’s nails; bought some household items; responded to a few Instagram DMs; and ate a snack because I was hungry.

Sound familiar?

Some of those tasks were relatively urgent — I need to get my passport in order soon, and those Instagram DMs were weighing on me. But none of those tasks were as important as writing this newsletter. I know I needed to get this done, but the call of those minor-yet-urgent tasks was too strong.

To all of my procrastinators out there, I offer an explanation: Your brain is working against you, and it’s because of a phenomenon called the urgency effect.

ADVERTISEMENT

Our brains tend to prioritize immediate satisfaction over long-term rewards (you probably remember this from the famous marshmallow experiment). But a study from February found that subjects were more likely to perform smaller-but-urgent tasks that had a deadline than they were to perform more important tasks without one. This was true even if the outcome of the smaller task was objectively worse than that of the larger one.

BUSINESSHere are some productivity techniques that can be adapted to your personality and working style.
“Normatively speaking,” the researchers wrote, “people may choose to perform urgent tasks with short completion windows, instead of important tasks with larger outcomes, because important tasks are more difficult and further away from goal completion, urgent tasks involve more immediate and certain payoffs, or people want to finish the urgent tasks first and then work on important tasks later.”

This is your last free article.

Subscribe to The Times
In other words: Even if we know a larger, less-urgent task is vastly more consequential, we will instinctively choose to do a smaller, urgent task anyway. Yet again, thanks for nothing, brain.

So what are we to do? To answer that, let’s talk about boxes — specifically, one developed by our 34th president, Dwight D. Eisenhower.

Picture a 2x2 square with four boxes. At the top of the square are two labels: Urgent and non-urgent. On the left are two other labels: Important and not important.

ADVERTISEMENT


Here’s a visual (thanks to James Clear, a friend of Smarter Living).

[Like what you’re reading? Sign up here for the Smarter Living newsletter to get stories like this (and much more!) delivered straight to your inbox every Monday morning.]

On any given day, try to put every task you have to do into one of those four boxes. You’ll quickly see that the things tied to approaching deadlines are quite often not the most important things you have on your plate. Accordingly, schedule time to finish them later or, if possible, delegate them.

SMARTER LIVINGSupercharge your productivity by slicing up your tasks into smaller units and knocking them out.
Similarly, it’s very likely you’ll wind up with tasks that don’t have a deadline and aren’t important. Immediately and aggressively remove them from your to-do list.

Two crucial bits I’ll leave you with:

If you’re struggling to figure out whether something is important to you, spend some time looking inward to see if it’s truly core to who you are and what your ambitions are.

Once you’ve mapped out all of your tasks, embrace the magic of micro-progress and slice them up into tiny goals to make them more manageable.

What are your systems for finding out what’s important to you? Tell me on Twitter at @timherrera or email me at tim@nytimes.com.

Have a great week!

— Tim

Best of Smarter Living
How to Clean Those Pesky Summer Stains It’s the season of hot dog condiment blobs, stubborn sunscreen residue and sweat stains … everywhere. Here’s how to clean things up.

The Rise of the Millennial Prenup Engaged? Congrats! Here’s when to consider a prenuptial agreement — and how to get started.

EDITORS’ PICKS

‘God Bless America’: 100 Years of an Immigrant’s Anthem

A Family in Transition

These Transgender Recruits Are Ready. The Military Isn’t.
ADVERTISEMENT


Confused About Blockchains? Here’s what you need to know.

What Travel Insurance Does and Doesn’t Cover When you book travel with a credit card, you usually get some kind of travel insurance — but what it doesn’t cover can leave you vulnerable. Here’s what you really get, and why you might want to buy additional coverage.

5 Cheap(ish) Things to Get You Started With Trail Running Trail running is like stepping into a different world. Here’s the gear to get you there.

18 Ways to Navigate Stress at the Airport Even before takeoff, the airport itself can be a stressful phase of travel. Here are strategies for dealing with anxieties and annoyances, large and small.  
What We’re Reading
As you probably know, I’m a Twitter obsessive, so I eagerly lapped up this look at “Local Twitter” from Taylor Lorenz, ace tech reporter at The Atlantic.

A certain generation remembers the “away status” from our angsty youths — intimate places where we could post inane-yet-personal messages meant more to broadcast a feeling than any particular message, whether that was excitement, heartbreak or simply boredom. (I posted my fair share of lyrics to Brand New when I was feeling particularly emotive.)

“Though most users do mainly follow people from their hometowns, local Twitter has more to do with what you tweet than where you live,” Ms. Lorenz writes. “The typical local Twitter user is a teen who is ‘in their own bubble of simple life pleasures and desires,’ doesn’t live their entire life online, ‘and uses Twitter to connect to their real-life friends like they used to do on Facebook,’ explains Raeequaza, a 22-year-old in New York.”
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/09/smarter-living/eisenhower-box-productivity-tips.html