My Name is Lucy Barton review, Bridge Theatre: Laura Linney's UK stage debut is a bittersweet delight 

By Dominic Cavendish, Theatre Critic 

7 June 2018 2:26pm 



“It was many years ago now, when I had to stay in a hospital for almost nine weeks.” So begins Elizabeth Strout’s best-selling novella of 2016, and so begins Rona Munro’s deft adaptation of the book, which brings the multi Emmy award-winning American actress Laura Linney onto the British stage for the first time. 

It’s not just any old stage she walks onto wearing simple black trousers, flat shoes and a baggy, deep-pocketed cardigan enwreathed with scarves – but the gleaming new 900-seater Bridge. Faintly terrifying, I’d imagine, when it’s just you, on your own, with only a hospital bed and an armchair as points of refuge.

Yet if there’s fear in Linney, it’s tucked inside a sustained, concerted smile of serenity that warms the auditorium just as potently as Peter Mumford’s lighting bathes Richard Eyre’s typically astute production. And if there’s a prime reason why the material earns its keep as a 90-minute theatrical experience, it’s that there’s a stirring affinity between the courage required of the actress and the resolve required of the everywoman figure she’s playing, by extension all of us.

Bad things have happened to Lucy Barton in the hazy distant past, growing up dirt-poor and subject to abusive neglect, loneliness her middle name, in rural Illinois. Memories swim into view as she battles a mysterious, possibly life-threatening illness in the mid-Eighties, gazing from a too-costly hospital room out onto the Chrysler Building, while being watched over by her estranged mother. 

Linney plays the heroine who in turn at times inhabits, to comic effect, the spikier persona of her mother, softer in age but still forbidding. They casually sift their lives over a remembered five nights of companionship. It’s a process akin to writing itself and Barton, latterly a successful author (evident shades of autobiography for Strout in this), links the ineffable familial healing-process with her own numinous vocation.


The original’s prose has a colloquial ease to it (“This is what I want to think… this is what I think”); at one level it’s speech but it’s interior too, a kind of soul-music. The evening honours that, avoids the temptation to turn hesitant observations into distinct scenes, forge a climactic showdown. The surprise – disappointment maybe for some – is there’s so little recriminatory ire; this isn’t a “hospital drama”.

Linney is perhaps best known in the UK for playing the unlucky-in-romance graphic designer Sarah in Love, Actually. And love, actually, is the prevailing theme here: a wistful coming to terms with what’s been and gone, including the marriage that Barton has walked out on, a world of ghosts. It could all be terribly pat in its attainment of “closure”, but Linney’s gift, as she clasps her hands, darts a glance elsewhere, is to suggest a trembling tightrope-walk across lingering despair. 

The beautiful video design shifts different vistas in and out of focus: Manhattan, desolate fields, the rain-splashed windscreen of the truck Lucy was locked in as a kid. But it’s also what you project – what you bring with you – that makes the night.

My Name is Lucy Barton runs until June 23. To book tickets, call 0333 320 0051 or visit bridgetheatre.co.uk

 
