Bill Clinton's first novel The President is Missing, review: 'More Jack Bauer than John Le Carré - and with a special interest in the female physique'

By Ed Power 

4 June 2018 1:39pm 



A maverick Commander-In-Chief, facing down impeachment charges and a baying media, puts his Presidency on the line to save humanity from impending disaster. Reading the President Is Missing, a high-octane collaboration between ex-Oval Office custodian Bill Clinton and bestseller conveyor belt James Patterson, it’s hard not to leap to the conclusion that the authors may have based their fictional Leader of the Free World on one comparatively recent holder of the office in particular. 

This is Clinton’s fiction debut, although he isn’t the first President to dabble in the form (Jimmy Carter published his historical romp the Hornet’s Nest in 2003). And Clinton already has one blockbuster to his credit, his 2.2 million selling 2004 autobiography My Life (he has also authored several “wonkish” tomes about policy). 

Nonetheless, anticipation over the novel is considerable – it’s already top of the bestseller charts on Amazon –  not least because of the sense that Clinton might use the thriller format to pull back the curtain on the inner-tickings of the White House. But while it certainly succeeds as a breathless read, the President is Missing will underwhelm anyone seeking an insider view on the workings of Washington. There is some grandstanding by Clinton – he’s outraged that his pretend President is threatened with impeachment by a blustering Speaker of the House – yet little that could be considered as shockingly revelatory. 

What is most revealing are Clinton’s musings on the qualities desirable in a Commander-in-Chief. President Jonathan Lincoln Duncan is a straight-shooter from a southern State (North Carolina rather than Arkansas). He’s also an actions first, questions later guy, with the common touch and an unshakeable belief in the inmate goodness of all Americans. Unlike Clinton, it is true, he’s a Desert Storm veteran and those impeachment charges are the result of his botched attempt to foil a terrorist rather than the consequences of canoodling with an intern. 

Still, nobody is going to mistake Duncan for Donald Trump, Barack Obama, George W Bush…or any other President whose first name doesn’t rhyme with “thrill”. Dashing through Washington on the trail of cyber-terrorists with iffy Eastern European accents, he pauses as he sees an African-American aggressively cuffed by police. The fate of the United States is in the balance but President Duncan can’t help pulling up when injustice unfolds in front of his eyes. 


Clinton’s love of low-culture is a matter of record, both during and after his Presidency. His staff were under not orders not to disturb him when he was watching Jack Bauer in 24 (or “Bauer Hour” as Clinton called it). And when he took to social media last year to recommend his favourite novels he included, amid the obligatory histories and autobiographies, Daniel Silva’s House of Spies, a caper about an ex-model pursuing a terrorist in the South of France. 

On the airport thriller spectrum, The President is Missing is more Jack Bauer than John Le Carré. A secular Middle Eastern terrorist group– Clinton and Patterson are at pains not to offend anyone apart from the Russians – is about to unleash an apocalyptic computer virus upon the United States. For reasons the book doesn’t spend very long delving into, the President has no choice but go off the grid and sort out the bad guys in person – starting with a liaison with two hackers who have apparently betrayed the terrorist kingpin. 

Patterson is master of the pacy read and The President Is Missing is never less than impeccably machine-tooled. Within the first few chapters, we learn the President is concealing a potentially life-changing health condition, that his beloved wife has been claimed by cancer (thus avoiding any potential Hilary comparisons) and that his staff are a quippy, West Wing-esque crew, snappily dressed – great care is taken to outline the appearance of female characters in particular – and with patter so sharp it could poke your eye out. 

There is also a lose cannon East European assassin, seemingly on the President’s trail. Inevitably the hired killer is a) female and b) devastatingly attractive. She also has a neatly tragic backstory and a love of classical music. You can picture the Hollywood adaptation right now. 

Actually you won’t have to picture it much longer as plans are underway for a TV spin-off airing on the Showtime network (potentially pitting Clinton against Barack and Michelle Obama, who have signed a production deal with Netflix). However the television version pans out, it surely won’t be as cheesily more-ish as the source material, which furthermore features a gloriously unhinged traitor-in-the-White House subplot (the big reveal could have come straight from Murder She Wrote). And there’s a Me Too moment at the end, presumably to compensate for all the times the novel pauses to fill you in on the physiques of the female protagonists (the hacker with the “hard, agile body”, the “tall, leggy, busty” contract killer etc).


Missing are any real insights into the workings of the White House. If you didn’t know better you might presume the authors had gleaned their knowledge of the executive branch of the American government via a trolly dash around the West Wing aisle of the nearest DVD store. Instead, Clinton’s thumb-prints are most detectable when President Duncan takes a pause from pegging it around suburban Washington DC on the tail of terrorists to pull out his soap box. 

There’s an early rant about how the media’s gotcha culture makes it impossible for principled politicians to do the right thing. Later Duncan – by now in a literal race against time to save humanity – stops to buy a sandwich for a veteran (and then explains why we should honour our veterans). A crisis meeting with the leader of Israel is elsewhere punctuated by Duncan’s reminder that the two disagree over the need for a two state solution while the novel concludes with an impassioned speech by President Clin…em, Duncan about the importance, in this time of very complicated terrorist plots, of Americans setting aside their differences and coming together. 

And yet the action zips along at such a rate that even these narrative road-blocks are reduced to little more than speed bumps. It’s full-proof hooey – by turns silly and overwrought. But Patterson, whose signatures include two-page chapters and rat-tat-tat dialogue, has perfected the art the irresistible read and, in the end, the addictive qualities are undeniable. Rattling through The President Is Missing is an impeachable offence only if you object to the idea of a novel as pure entertainment. 

