This community obsessed with hating Stuart Little is the best thing on Facebook

Apparently there's a whole community of people who really, really hate Stuart Little. 

Stuart Little, the adorable mouse from the 1945 book and 1999 animated kids' movie Stuart Little, is like any other anthropomorphic teenage rodent. He struggles to bond with his (human) brother, he enjoys boat races in New York City's Central Park, and he ultimately brings his newly adopted family closer together. 

What else could you expect from a heartwarming children's story? 

Not everyone falls for the Littles' heartwarming story. A Facebook page called "I hate Stuart Little" was created in early June and it's been rapidly gaining followers in the past week. As of Wednesday, the page has more than 45,000 likes. 

Here's an example of how much "I hate Stuart Little" hates Stuart Little:

And the page's creator makes it clear that this isn't just shitposting. This is genuine, vitriolic rage toward an animated mouse. Which is the best kind of shitposting. 

"It's just an intense hatred that can't be explained," the page's creator said through Facebook Messages. "Whenever I see him my blood just starts to boil."

The anonymous creator, who admitted he's a 21-year-old guy from the U.K., wouldn't disclose any other personal details about himself, but said that he started the page because it was funny. 

"Talking shit on Stuart Little just seems really absurd because he's just a CGI mouse," the creator said. He was inspired by online hate for Grandpa Joe, the feeble, optimistic (read: lazy, opportunistic) grandfather in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.

"I think I've struck a nerve with some people who legitimately love Stuart Little," the page's creator said. 

Page lore includes another meme which pits Stuart Little against Remy, the chef rat from Ratatouille. 

But why does he hate that little animated mouse so much?

Here's the creator's full reasoning, because to condense it would be a crime:

He’s got a smug fucking face and I don’t understand how he tried to get into a relationship with a bird (completely different species) and also the fact that the little family adopted him instead of orphaned children who obviously needed it a lot more than Stuart.

He has a point — who in their right minds would adopt a MOUSE as a SON, knowing that there are HUMAN children who still didn't have loving and caring parents?

"Also they let him play football with regular sized children," the page creator added. "He's a mouse he shouldn't be doing human shit."

The page's creator admitted that he actually likes Michael J. Fox, who voices Stuart in the movie, but hates the mouse itself.

"His voice is perfect for the character though" the page creator said, and added that if Fox voices Stuart Little in any remakes of the movie, he'll probably see it.

When asked if he had plans to create any other shitposting pages dedicated to hating on beloved childhood stories, he said he wants to expand the anti-Stuart Little community.

"I might create a Facebook group to go with the page so people can post their own Stuart Little memes there," he said.

Although Stuart Little has been disliked for years, "I hate Stuart Little" is one of the largest, and newest, communities that share such a strong hatred for that little mouse.



