Hugh Hefner's daughter Christie opens up about keeping Playboy founder's legacy alive
For Christie Hefner, visiting the Playboy Mansion was a child’s dream.

Christie, 65, continues to have fond memories of her many visits to the original opulent adult playground in her father's native Chicago.

The domain for Playboy magazine founder Hugh Hefner and his bunnies was based in the Windy City from 1959 to 1974.


LIFE ADVICE FROM HUGH HEFNER

Hefner would move on west and the new Playboy Mansion was then based in Los Angeles. He sold that property in 2016 but was allowed to live there until his death in 2017 at age 91.

“What made it magical was that it had a trap door,” Christie told Fox News. “It had a secret panel. It had a game room where every game was available without ever having to put a quarter in it. It had a fireman’s pole. It was just a really cool place if you were a kid. It had a bowling alley, an underground pool — it was pretty fun.”


And while Hefner was busy leading a publishing empire, he also was willing to take part in pursuing his other passion — playing games.

“He loved playing games,” stressed Christie. “When I was younger, we used to play Monopoly with a group of friends. He got very into Backgammon. Very into pinball. He was definitely one of those people who wasn’t very into sports but was a constant game player, and I would add, a highly competitive game player.”

But life wasn’t always fun and games for Christie. People magazine noted she ran the family business alongside her father for 26 years until 2009. And in 1979, she established the Hugh M. Hefner First Amendment Awards, in conjuction with Playboy’s 25th anniversary.

The awards aim to honor those who have made significant contributions in protecting First Amendment right for all Americans.


This year’s ceremony, the first since Hefner’s passing, took place June 4 at the Newseum in Washington, D.C. The Lifetime Achievement Award was granted to Joan E. Bertin, longtime executive director of the National Coalition Against Censorship (NCAC).

Christie said the awards continue to celebrate her father, a man who was determined to protect civil rights in his lifetime.

“I think one of the things that led Playboy to its success was that it was based on the philosophy of ideas around social justice and personal freedom,” she explained. “And the company’s activities over many years, whether it was syndicating TV shows with an integrated cast in spite that Southern stations wouldn’t accept the programming… to launching the careers of African-American artists. I think it’s fundamental to who he was and what Playboy is, a deep belief in social justice and personal freedom.”

The New York Times reported the Playboy Philosophy advocated freedom of speech in all its aspects. Hefner also supported progressive social causes and even lost some sponsors after he invited black guests to its televised parties at a time when much of the nation still had Jim Crow laws in place.

