Meet the Man Who Dressed Mick Jagger
He was “an inspired young designer with a starry clientele.” Mick wore him (at his Saint-Tropez 
wedding to Bianca, 1971). Lennon wore him (at his Gibraltar wedding to Yoko, 1969). The Beatles 
wore him on the cover of “Abbey Road” (all except George, who wore jeans. George!).
Three out of four Beatles wear Nutter suits for the “Abbey Road” album cover.
At the end of the 1960s and through the 1970s, the suit owed a debt of gratitude to Tommy Nutter, 
the British tailor who gate-crashed Savile Row, the seat and symbol of English suit-making, and 
bent it — or at least, his own particular corner of it, at No. 35a — to his own image. Young, 
gay, handsome and socially effervescent, Nutter de-cobwebbed bespoke tailoring.
A bespoke suit, custom made, fitted and refitted, was an expensive, essentially conservative 
proposition, a suit of armor and the bedrock of a gentleman’s wardrobe, but distinctly not a 
fashionable item. A Savile Row suit “rarely looks new in the conventional sense,” the Australian 
journalist Lance Richardson writes in his new history of Tommy Nutter (and his brother, David), 
“House of Nutter.” Its magic, he goes on, “is that it enhances your real self into heightened 
fantasy, then presents this fantasy as your real self.”
Nutter brought a substantial dose of fantasy to the fantasy. He began on Savile Row at the lowest 
levels, picking up pins at G. Ward & Company, where he eventually joined forces with a talented 
young cutter named Edward Sexton and, with him, opened Nutters in 1969 — the first new tailor on 
Savile Row in more than a century. His investors included Peter Brown, a manager of the Beatles 
(he stepped in when his friend and former boss Brian Epstein died), and the pop star Cilla Black.
Nutter was already a fixture on the London scene, well connected via Brown, his boyfriend for a 
time. The Nutters suit, unlike others on the Row, was cut for flash: tight-waisted and small-
chested to emphasize the body, with a long jacket and mega lapels. Fabrics and colors were chosen 
to stand out rather than stand back. Men and women both flocked in: Bianca as well as Mick, Diana 
Ross, Eric Clapton, Twiggy, Peter Sellers. Elton John, who first came to Nutters in 1971, ordered 
in bulk.
“House of Nutter” traces the ascent and untimely end of Tommy Nutter, and the parallel history of 
his brother, David: also gay, also embedded in the world of rock ’n’ roll, though as a photographer
and confidant. Tommy bloomed out of London’s Swinging Sixties and became an internationally 
recognized designer, a celebrity in his own right. He was as much a character as a person, natty 
and fabulous in a wild suit — “People expect one to turn up looking like a chic Bozo the Clown,” 
he once said — a salesman taking his show on the road. (Sexton, mostly back at base on Savile Row, 
was the better craftsman.)
The Nutter story intersects not only a steady stream of the rich and famous. It also joins many 
of the currents of the 20th century: the ebb and flow from wartime privation to excess back to 
austerity; the progress of gay visibility and the trauma of the AIDS crisis; the shaking off of 
dress codes and then (to Nutter’s sometime chagrin) the irrevocable casualization of the wardrobe. 
His professional fortunes rose and fell as tastes changed, but he was, his last business partner 
says, profitable when he succumbed to an AIDS-related illness in 1992 at 49.
What Richardson has to contend with, not always successfully, is that, for all of their contemporary 
fame, the passage of time hasn’t been especially kind to the Nutter brothers. Tommy is still cited 
as an inspiration by both men’s and women’s designers — the much-imitated women’s wear designer 
Phoebe Philo has on occasion nodded in his direction — but his lasting influence is probably less 
than that of his contemporaries, despite his self-conscious alignment with the greats. (More than 
once, Richardson quotes Tommy as comparing himself to Dior, and when Giorgio Armani came to 
prominence in the 1980s, Nutter declared him “on my same wavelength.”)
As an act of historical preservation, “House of Nutter” is worthy, restoring Nutter to the record 
for future generations; as a scandal sheet of gossip, it is often campy and fun. But despite the 
parade of stars who pass through it, “House of Nutter” often wrestles with a sense of anticlimax. 
David Nutter did travel with Elton John, photographing his tours and performances, but so, too, 
did Terry O’Neill, whose photos are more definitive. Tommy did shake up staid Savile Row and charm 
Mick, Bianca and the rest, but it is noticeable that none of them agreed to be interviewed for this 
book.
What lingers is the vision of Tommy Nutter as a man slightly too modern for his time, though very 
much of it, one of the great characters of fashion if not, perhaps, one of the greats.
That, and his durable belief in the power of the suit. “Although this is a far cry from today’s 
philosophy, where jeans, T-shirt and sneakers are de rigueur,” he said in an interview near the 
end of his life, “a young man would be hard pushed to find a better investment than a handmade 
suit, to give himself a lift up the ladder of success.” It did for him.