MAY’S MERKEL PLEA Theresa May tries to woo Angela Merkel and rescue her Brexit plan from rejection by EU leaders before her Cabinet even get to discuss it

The PM has flown to Germany as part of a plan to get Brussels to hold off from attacking her ‘third way’ customs compromise until she takes warring ministers to Chequers away day

THERESA MAY today tried to woo Angela Merkel and convince her to hold off from attacking her new Brexit plan before her Cabinet even get to discuss it.

Speaking with German Chancellor over lunch today, she outlined her so-called “third way” customs compromise ahead of her Cabinet away day at Chequers tomorrow.

But David Davis is leading a frantic bid by senior Tory Eurosceptics to talk Mrs May out of her controversial ‘soft Brexit’ proposal.

The Sun revealed the Brexit Secretary shares Leave-backing MPs’ anger the new No10 blueprint betrays the referendum result.

As well as two face-to-face meeting with the Prime Minister he has reportedly written to her warning the tariff system which she will present at her official country residence tomorrow – known as the “facilitated customs arrangement” - is completely unworkable.

While Downing Street are briefing that it is the “the best of both worlds”, the Telegraph are reporting Mr Davis believes it is simply the customs partnership idea which Brexiteers have already rejected, but with some additional technological elements.

Whitehall sources are trying to dismiss claims the compromise forces Britain to keep collecting EU tariffs – which would stop us from striking new trade deals.

For the PM though, what is even more pressing than getting her warring ministers to get behind it, is to make sure the rest of the EU is willing to accept it, even if it is just a starting point for negotiations.

She went to see Dutch leader Mark Rutte on Tuesday - and today hoped to bring Ms Merkel onside.

In a boost for Mrs May she is said to have won round business with the new plan, after the Government’s relationship with firms was damaged by a war of words between bosses and senior ministers.

girls
But the UK's biggest car-marker Jaguar Land Rover revealed overnight that it may quit the UK if the country crashes out of the EU with a no-deal Brexit.

It joins other firms including Airbus and BMW who have threatened to leave or scale back their work in the UK once we leave.

Jaguar boss Ralf Speth reportedly said he didn’t want to “threaten” the government, but added he fears the eye-watering costs without a deal will leave the firm no choice but to move abroad to “save the company”.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6701610/theresa-may-flies-to-berlin-to-rescue-her-brexit-plan-from-rejection-by-eu-leaders-before-her-cabinet-even-get-to-discuss-it/