BENEFITS BLAST Esther McVey says sorry for ‘misleading’ MPs’ and the public over Universal Credit

The Work and Pensions Secretary has been blasted for giving 'incorrect' statements to MPs after a damning report slammed the Department's flagship benefits scheme

ESTHER McVey has apologised today for misleading MPs and the public about Universal Credit.

The Work and Pensions Secretary was blasted for giving "incorrect" statements in the House of Commons by the spending watchdog after a damning report slammed the Government's flagship benefits scheme.

In an open letter released this morning, Sir Amyas Morse, the head of the National Audit Office, said her claim that the "world leading" Universal Credit programme is working "has not been proven" and other comments were "not correct".

And he said that his office had insisted that the Department must slow down its roll-out across the country to make sure that its performance doesn't get any worse and leave more Brits out of pocket.

The letter said that the report was "fully agreed with senior officials in your department" and was based on the "most accurate and up-to-date" information that was possible.

Ms McVey was forced to tell the Commons this lunchtime: "I mistakenly said that the NAO had asked for Universal Credit to be rolled out at faster rate and to be speeded up, but they didn't say that. I want to apologise for that and for misleading you."

But she doubled down on claims that the NAO had failed to take into account all of the changes the Department had made before they released that report.

In the letter Sir Amyas Morse also wrote: "Your department confirmed this to me in writing on 6 June and we then reached final agreement on the report by 8 June.

"It is odd that by 15 June you you felt able to say the NAO 'did not take into account the impact of our recent changes'.

"You reiterated these statements on 2 July but we have seen no evidence of such impacts nor fresh information."

Ms Mcvey said that the impact of advances in cash for those on Universal Credit and the removal of waiting days for payments were "still being felt and cannot have fully been taken into account by the NAO report."

The letter claimed Sir Amyas had asked her for meetings but has yet to have secured one. The DWP said it's working on getting a date secured.

Green MP Caroline Lucas today said she was "lying" and should resign from her position.

She tweeted: "Things have reached a new low when the National Audit Office accuses a Cabinet Minister of lying. #UniversalCredit is failing, and if Esther McVey is not up to the job of sorting it out – as seems to be the case – then she has to go."

Rt Hon Frank field MP, Chair of the Work and Pension's Committee, said: “This is so serious that I will ask the Speaker tomorrow for an Urgent Question, so that the Secretary of State returns to the House to withdraw what the NAO believes to be totally inaccurate, as DWP officials well know.”

And Labour's Shadow Work and Pensions Secretary Margaret Greenwood said she could consider her position.

"Esther McVey has admitted that she misled Parliament," she said. "She did so not once, but twice, on 21st June and 2nd July, despite the fact that her own department had agreed the NAO report on 8th June.

"If she didn’t read it properly, that’s incompetence. If she did read it properly and knowingly misled Parliament, then she should resign."

It comes after the NAO gave a damning report into Universal Credit, revealing just how it's failing.

The new welfare scheme is designed to wrap a number of benefits into a single monthly payment, and replace payments like child tax credit, housing benefit and jobseeker's allowance.

The report said that a fifth of claimants' payments are delayed, it costs more to run, is taking six years longer than planned to roll out, and is driving people to food banks.

But the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions claimed that Universal Credit IS working.

In a statement in the Commons in response to the report she dismissed the study, and said it was a "unique example of great British innovation".

vans
Former Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan-Smith announced the introduction of a Universal Credit in 2010 designed to simplify the benefits system and improve work incentives - making it the landmark policy of his time in government.

He backed his successor last week, saying the NAO report was a "shoddy piece of work".

The Department for Work and Pensions has been approached for comment.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6693034/esther-mcvey-universal-credit-accused-misleading-mps-latest/