GET ON THE GRID Best F1 driving experience days you can buy in 2018
If you’ve always wanted to get behind the wheel of an F1 car, here are some of the best experience days you can buy in the UK
F1 EXPERIENCE days are a great way of testing your mettle behind the wheel.
But while it’s pretty expensive to take to the track in a genuine F1 car, there are plenty of cheaper alternatives you can find that are still a lot of fun.
Driving simulators can give you a realistic F1 experience without breaking the bank
Driving simulator
The cheapest way to feel as though you’re driving an F1 car is a simulator.
Not only are they fun, they’re also good value for money as instead of a few minutes speeding around a real track, you can usually get an hour plus to test out your reaction times.
There’s a £39 deal you can get from Virgin Experience Days that gets you 60 minutes driving time and the chance to experience four difference Grand Prix races.
The top three drivers in your session will also be presented with a trophy, in case you're feeling competitive.
Into The Blue offers up another option for £39.
Their package lets you link up with up to nine other drivers in a competitive environment that sees you complete a 20-minute qualifying session before heading into 5-6 races to decide the winner on the day.
Single-seater experience
If you’re determined to get in some track time, you can experience something close to an F1 car with a single-seater race day package.
The top-rated package we’ve seen is on Buy a Gift for £99 which lets you choose between three high-powered racers for a 15-minute session around Silverstone’s famous race track.
One of the options is a single-seater racer which mimics the feel on an F1 car by keeping you low to the road and giving you a massive power-to-weight ratio as you blast around the iconic race course.
Or, if you want to double your track time at Silverstone without doubling the price, you can get 30 minutes drive time for £179 from Buy a Gift which gets you 10 minute session behind a pace car and then 20 minutes tearing around the track at your own speed.