DRINK-DRIVE RAP Uni student, 31, caught drink-driving for the fourth time in three years walks free after saying she drank to cope with abortion

Naomi Kaneko, 31, was found slumped at the wheel of her BMW 320 with a bottle of wine in the footwell

A UNIVERSITY student caught drink-driving for the fourth time in three years has walked free from court after claiming she got drunk to cope with an abortion.

Naomi Kaneko, 31, was found slumped at the wheel of her BMW 320 with a bottle of wine in the footwell mere yards from her luxury flat in Hale, Greater Manchester.

Cops described her as “very, very incoherent” with a breathalyser test finding her more than three times the drink-drive limit.

But today Kaneko, who is studying a masters in psychology, burst into tears as she was handed a 16 week suspended sentence at Manchester magistrates’ court.

She claimed she had been drinking after attending an abortion clinic to end an unexpected pregnancy at the request of her boyfriend.

The therapist also said she was suffering stress after being diagnosed with dyslexia.

Kaneko was convicted of drink driving three times in 2015 but was spared jail on each occasion, the court heard.

She was arrested on her way home from a night out on at 9.30pm on March 13.

Prosecuting, Robin Lynch said: “Police had responded to reports of a female being intoxicated whilst being in a vehicle.

“Officers arrived at the scene and saw the defendant sat in the driver’s seat of a black BMW, she had a mobile phone in her hand, the engine was running and the lights were illuminated.

“Officers observed the defendant to be very very incoherent, with particular slurred speech and she was unsteady on her feet. It should also be said that a bottle of alcohol was found in the vehicle also.

“They requested a specimen of breath a number of times, she eventually did provide a reading and was arrested and taken to the police station where she provided a further reading."

Initially it is thought Kaneko blew 141 microgrammes of alcohol in 100 millilitres of breath but a subsequent confirmed breath test reading showed 120mg. The legal limit is 35mg.

Kaneko admitted driving with excess alcohol. Details of her previous drink driving offences were not given at the hearing.

But a probation report said: “She said at the time of the offence she was experiencing a lot of extreme trauma following the termination of her pregnancy and she was dealing with that at the time of the offence.

“She felt she should have looked for assistance instead of turning to alcohol. Her partner did not wish for her to keep the baby, and she felt she should have taken more time to decide.

“She was also diagnosed with dyslexia and this has added to stresses. She understands the consequences of what could have happened. She is very disappointed in herself, things were going well for her up until this offence.

“She accepts alcohol has been an issue, and it has been an issue since she was 21, she used alcohol regularly due to her previous employment when she was drinking on a social basis.

“She was with her ex-husband and they have a nine year old daughter together, he was a big drinker too and there was some domestic abuse and she has since stayed away from that situation.

“She does have previous convictions for drink driving but she suffers with anxiety and has since been diagnosed with Post Traumatic Syndrome.

"She has been referred to counselling, and due to long waiting list on the NHS, she pays privately for it.

“She volunteers once a week in the detoxification ward of a hospital in Prestwich. She also works as a support worker where she helps others with their own issues.

“She works around her daughter and is her main carer. She is studying for her master’s degree at Salford and has a stable relationship with her current partner.”

Defending, Hojol Uddin said a custodial sentence would have a severe impact on his client’s family.

He told the court: “You must be concerned with the impact on others as well as the impact on her - she has full custody of the child.

“There are no current arrangements in place if she does receive custody. If she does receive custody, I will have to contact her ex-partner and he would have to try and make arrangements. He provides little or no support.

“Her daughter is her sole responsibility. She was just 350 metres from her home, yet I accept she could have come into contact with other road users or the public. She has made significant efforts since 2015.

"She has been doing a masters and will not be able to complete her dissertation if she is in custody. She has a realistic prospect of rehabilitation but this is her last chance. She is extremely disappointed with herself.”

Sentencing, District Judge James Hatton told Kaneko: “Unfortunately for you, your record of previous convictions is disgraceful.

“There were three separate offences of drink driving in 2015 and these are offences were custody would be appropriate.

“But I have seen many letters to suggest you’re getting help for your personal circumstances.

"Those alone would not be sufficient to persuade me against a custodial sentence but my main concerns are about your daughter and what will happen to her should you be sent to prison.

her
“For that reason I will suspend your sentence. But let me make it abundantly clear, if you breach your sentence by the commissioning of another offence, you will be brought back to court and your feet will not touch the floor.

“I promise you, you will go straight to prison and I will not blink when I send you down. Be sure of that.”
Kaneko was also ordered to complete 150 hours unpaid work and pay £200 costs. She was banned from driving for five years.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6704446/uni-student-31-caught-drink-driving-for-the-fourth-time-in-three-years-walks-free-after-saying-she-drank-to-cope-with-abortion/