New shopping platform helps you save the planet on Earth Day and beyond

It's almost Earth Day, and this year you can help protect the planet simply by shopping online.

In honor of the day of environmental awareness on April 22, philanthropic tech startup DoneGood has launched a new shopping platform that helps you support eco-friendly brands and organizations.

The Purchase for the Planet site is an online store where people can shop for a variety of sustainable products, such as toiletries, kitchen utensils, accessories, cleaning products, housewares, clothing and shoes, food, and more — all made by companies with "highly ethical and sustainable business practices."
The initiative is a result of a partnership between DoneGood, which first launched as part of Harvard Innovation Labs' Venture Incubation Program, and 1% For the Planet, an international organization that works with businesses to raise funds for environmental causes
Ten percent of the money earned on the Purchase for the Planet site will be donated to 1% for the Planet, and DoneGood — which earns a share of profits on each item purchased from the site — will be donating all of its proceeds to the organization as well.

And because each individual brand featured on the site is a member of 1% for the Planet, they'll also be donating 1 percent of their product revenues to approved environmental nonprofits they support. 

For example, Jelt, a brand thats sells a variety of belts made from 100% recycled water bottles, donates its 1 percent to Yellowstone Forever and The Greater Yellowstone Coalition, two nonprofits dedicated to preserving Yellowstone National Park and the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem. And Newly, which sells household items made from recycled materials, supports the Southern Environmental Law Center
Other brands on the Purchase for the Planet site, such as Yoga Democracy, which makes sportswear and yoga pants that help fight climate change, donated last year's profits to The Sierra Club and Southwest Wildlife, a local nonprofit that rehabilitates endangered Mexican Gray Wolves. And Meliora Cleaning Products, which creates all-natural cleaning products to cut down on toxins in the environment, supports several organizations like Women's Voices for the Earth, MADE SAFE, and B Lab.

"Consumer purchasing power is the world’s greatest force for change, especially where the environment is concerned," said Cullen Schwarz, cofounder of DoneGood, in a press release.
"Americans donate around $11 billion to nonprofits focused on protecting our environment and wildlife each year. Meanwhile, we all spend $350 billion each day buying goods and services," Schwarz added. "If even a fraction of the purchases we all make are redirected to companies with eco-friendly business practices and efforts to create a healthier planet, the impact is exponential."

The partners plan to continue adding additional impactful companies to the online store in the future, so you'll be able to shop and save the planet well beyond Earth Day.

"Whether positive or negative, the money we spend has a dramatic effect on our food, water, air, land, climate, and wildlife," said Kate Williams, CEO of 1% for the Planet, in a statement. "Saving the planet — its oceans, species, and lands — starts with us."

While some of the products may be a bit costly, you can filter results by price. The platform also offers additional discounts and special offers.

And remember, you're saving the planet.