The Science (and the Scientists) Behind ‘Ant-Man’
Image
Ant-Man (Paul Rudd), left, and the Wasp (Evangeline Lilly) in the new sequel.CreditMarvel
By Darryn King
July 6, 2018

Several months before production began on the new sequel “Ant-Man and the Wasp,” the director Peyton Reed and a room full of writers, artists and producers assembled in the Marvel Studios offices in Burbank, Calif., to listen to a quantum physicist explain the science of getting really, really small.

Recalling the meeting recently, the quantum physicist, Spyridon Michalakis of the Institute for Quantum Information and Matter at Caltech, said that he described the subatomic realm as “a place of infinite possibility, an alternative universe where the laws of physics and forces of nature as we know them haven’t crystallized.” He had suggestions about how it might be visualized on a movie screen: “beautiful colors changing constantly to reflect transience.”

The movie’s producer, Stephen Broussard, said, “I’m not completely sure I have my head around it yet, but it certainly sparked some interesting ideas for what this place could be.”

In the first “Ant-Man” movie (2015), Scott Lang, the title character played by Paul Rudd, wields the power to shrink to the size of a Tic Tac under the tutelage of the scientist Hank Pym (Michael Douglas) and his daughter, Hope van Dyne (Evangeline Lilley). “When you’re small, energy’s compressed,” Hope tells Scott. “So, you have the force of a 200-pound man behind a fist a hundredth of an inch wide. You’re like a bullet.”

ADVERTISEMENT


If an explanation of molecular density seems like an odd fit for a training montage in a superhero movie, it speaks to the way that science, including the latest developments in quantum theory, informs and inspires the “Ant-Man” series.

In “Ant-Man and the Wasp,” due Friday, July 6, with Hope taking on the nimble wings and identity of the similarly minuscule Wasp, one character suffers from a (fictional) condition referred to as “molecular disequilibrium.” Two others fuse together across a great distance, much in the way particles do in the actual phenomenon of quantum entanglement. There’s talk of tardigrade fields and time vortexes, and Laurence Fishburne delivers a technically sound lecture on something called quantum decoherence.

Video
 
By Marvel Studios 2:25
Trailer: ‘Ant-Man and the Wasp’
A preview of the film.Published OnJune 26, 2018CreditImage by Ben Rothstein/Marvel-Disney
And yes, a character does shrink so small as to be plunged into the Quantum Realm, named after and based on scientific reality, where the laws of classical physics break down.

“Marvel really has gone out of their way to incorporate real, interesting science,” Dr. Michalakis said. “I think they realize that so much real science almost feels like science-fiction.” Along with the entomologist Steven Kutcher, who suggested ways to film live ants, Dr. Michalakis worked as a scientific consultant on the first “Ant-Man.” He was even more closely involved in the sequel, collaborating with Erik Sommers and Chris McKenna, two of the writers developing the script. He also consulted on “Spider-Man: Homecoming” (2017) and “Captain Marvel,” due in 2019.

ADVERTISEMENT


Persuasive science has played a major role at the movies this year. The cosmologist Stephon Alexander consulted on the sci-fi fantasy “A Wrinkle in Time,” the geneticist Adam Rutherford advised on the multifarious mutations in the sci-fi-horror movie “Annihilation,” and the paleontologist Jack Horner lent his expertise to “Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom.”

What’s perhaps surprising is that superhero movies, fueled as they are by fantastic impossibilities, are increasingly incorporating scientific detail and authenticity. Most recently, the astronomer-physicist Adam Frank advised on wormholes and interstellar travel for “Thor: Ragnarok,” while the anthropologist Jim Ferguson and the aerospace engineering expert Daniel Bodony consulted on “Black Panther.” Since its start in 2008, the National Academy of Sciences’ Science and Entertainment Exchange, which has provided such experts for more than 2,300 television and movie projects, has played scientific matchmaker for several Marvel movies and television series, including “Agent Carter,” “Luke Cage” and “Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.”

Image
Scientists consulted on several movies this year, including "Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom."CreditUniversal Studios, via Associated Press
Historically, Marvel comics have tended to present at least the sheen of science, with much of the superheroics tied to characters’ skills as scientists, inventors and engineers: Tony Stark, a.k.a. Iron Man, is an alumnus of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, while T’Challa (Black Panther) has a Ph.D. in physics from Oxford University.

“I can’t speak to the accuracy of the comics,” Mr. Sommers, the writer, said, “but there’s definitely a willingness, over the decades, to latch onto new ideas and new theories. Ant-Man in particular involves a very specific technology that shrinks you down to an atomic and subatomic level so, now at least, making sure the science is as accurate as possible is especially important.”

In fact, there’s a scientific logic to the design of the Ant-Man suit in the movies that wasn’t in the original comics: The helmet is fully contained, with a mouthpiece that presumably allows the shrunken protagonist to metabolize regular-sized but relatively giant air molecules.

ADVERTISEMENT


Not that the Ant-Man movies completely unpack the science. They go into relatively little detail about the “organic atom reduction,” apparently reducing the distance between atoms, that makes Ant-Man shrink, or what happens to his mass when that takes place. “That’s the least credible part,” Dr. Michalakis said. “How does a 160-pound man ride on ants, if he hasn’t somehow converted his mass into something else? You cannot just convert it into energy without containing it. Otherwise you have a nuclear bomb of unprecedented destructive power.”

Mr. Broussard, the producer, acknowledged that “the movies have to work as movies, so we take a lot of liberties.” He added, “We have the philosophy that the most fun idea wins. And what’s great is that we’ll get in the room with someone like Spiros, and we’ll pitch them an idea that has no basis in science fact, and they’ll be the first to say, that’s cool, do that. Which usually tells us we’re on the right track.”

It helps if the scientific consultant appreciates the needs of dramatic storytelling. It was Dr. Michalakis who mentioned the microscopic creatures known as tardigrades as something striking that one might encounter in the movie’s Quantum Realm. “They remind me of the massive worms from ‘Dune,’” he said. And he approves of the movie’s particular take on quantum entanglement, which is a stretch scientifically but narratively satisfying. “It’s actually a good example of how real science can move the story forward.”

For the record, he does have a possible explanation for the science behind Ant-Man’s organic atom reduction. (It involves replacing electrons with their heavier cousins, muons, reducing each atom to two-hundredths of its original size.) There will be plenty of time to delve deeper into the science in future installments though. For now, he’s excited to see science play a part in a summer popcorn movie, where it might ignite the imagination of young audiences.

“When I think about science outreach, I can’t think of a more fun way to do it than with superheroes.”
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/06/movies/antman-and-the-wasp-science.html