Rhino Embryos Made in Lab to Save Nearly Extinct Subspecies
If you had asked Thomas Hildebrandt a decade ago whether the northern white rhinoceros could be 
saved, his answer would have been grim. The rhino’s numbers had dwindled to single digits, and 
the few remaining individuals all had severe reproductive issues.
“We thought, ‘The story’s over,’” said Dr. Hildebrandt, a wildlife reproductive biologist at the 
Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research and the Free University of Berlin. His prognosis 
got even bleaker when Sudan, the last male of the subspecies, died in captivity last spring.
But on Wednesday, Dr. Hildebrandt and a team of colleagues reported in the journal Nature 
Communications that the story of the northern white rhino is not, in fact, over.
Using frozen sperm from northern white rhinos and eggs from closely related southern white rhinos, 
the scientists created hybrid embryos that can potentially be implanted into surrogate southern 
white rhino mothers.
This lab achievement is a very early step toward the much longer-term goal of resurrecting a 
population of full-blooded northern white rhinos, said Jan Stejskal, director of international 
projects at the Dvur Kralove Zoo in the Czech Republic and an author of the paper, in a press 
briefing on Tuesday.
Multiple teams around the world are now working collaboratively on high-tech options for bringing 
back the northern white rhino, which is now functionally extinct. Only two females, a 
mother-daughter pair named Najin and Fatu, are still alive at Ol Pejeta Conservancy in Kenya.
One avenue is in vitro fertilization with northern white rhino eggs and sperm. This would involve 
producing early embryos in petri dishes that could then be transferred to develop in surrogate 
southern white rhinos, another subspecies.
Dr. Hildebrandt and his collaborators started to investigate this possibility. They had frozen sperm 
samples from four northern white males, and successfully used one sample to fertilize eggs from two 
southern white females, creating four hybrid embryos in total. Additionally, they created three 
full southern white rhino embryos.
The next step is to implant the southern white or hybrid embryos into surrogates, which should 
happen in the coming months, said Cesare Galli, founder and managing director of Avantea, a 
reproductive biotechnology company based in Italy, and an author of the paper.