The CEO of the world's biggest sneaker marketplace explains how a string of failed startups led to one worth $250 million
GOAT is the world's largest resale marketplace for high-end sneakers, and is valued at $250 million.
Its cofounder and CEO Eddy Lu spent more than 10 years creating and leading failed startups and business projects before achieving success.
He credits struggles — and even fights — with his cofounder Daishin Sugano in their early days of working together to their current efficient workflow and mutual understanding.

For more than a decade, Eddy Lu tried to find the next big thing: 99-cent smartphone apps, golf apparel, Japanese desserts. They all flopped, but he wasn't headed back to the Wall Street world he left.

Then he got into high-end sneakers with an online marketplace called GOAT— as in "Greatest of All Time," as they say in sports and rap. And in 2015, on Black Friday, GOAT blew up. It couldn't keep up, and thousands of orders went unfilled. Lu felt sick about it, but he also knew he finally had something worth fighting for.

He told us what that was like, in an episode of Business Insider's podcast, "Success! how I Did It": "We responded to every single customer-service message. I think there were about 4,500 that day. But at that point it was better to be hated than unknown."

Today GOAT is the world's largest sneaker-resale market. It has over $100 million in funding, 7 million users, more than 300 employees, and 400,000 pairs for sale. It raised its latest round of funding at a valuation of $250 million, according to Recode. Earlier this year, it merged with the retail store Flight Club, an iconic reseller in the sneakerhead world, and one that can provide GOAT with the international reach it needs to scale.

Lu's cofounder, Daishin Sugano, has been with him for every failed startup. And Lu says it's thanks to him — and a pair of counterfeit sneakers — that they finally hit the ground running.

Listen to the full episode here:


Subscribe to "Success! How I Did It" on Apple Podcasts, Google Play, or your favorite podcast app. Check out previous episodes with:

Girl Scouts CEO Sylvia Acevedo
Best-selling author David Sedaris
Clique Brands CEO Katherine Power
Quicken Loans founder Dan Gilbert
Transcript edited for clarity.

Eddy Lu: My cofounder, he's a huge sneaker enthusiast. He started buying sneakers when his dad bought him his first pair of Jordans, the Jordan 5 Grapes, back in the day.

Rich Feloni: Yeah, with the purple in them.

Lu: Yeah. And 23 years later, because Michael Jordan's number is 23, they rereleased the Jordan 5 Grapes. He went on eBay, bought a pair, and he got them, and they just didn't feel right. They turned out to be fake. He tried to ask the seller for his money back; he tried to contact eBay. It's just an onerous process. We were just, like, "We could build a really great app to help clean up this market." So we built GOAT.

Dropping everything to build anything
Feloni: At what point in your life did you realize you wanted to be an entrepreneur?

Lu: After my aspiring basketball career ended. The Lakers didn't draft me out of college. It's not like I had a network of lemonade stands when I was a kid or anything like that.

Feloni: So you're not falling into that mythology there, no?

Lu: For me, I always liked building things, and that's why I did computer science. I graduated in 2003 when CS wasn't in favor. It was after the dot-com bust, and it was just because I liked building things that I wanted to do computer science. I went into the corporate life. I was a consultant. I was an analyst at Lehman Brothers when that still existed.

Feloni: Why did you get into finance if you got a computer-science degree?

Lu: I never wanted to do hardcore programming. I did like building businesses, and thinking about new problems. But going into corporate life, I realized I'm not a good employee, to be honest. Every night, and this is back to when I worked at Lehman, I became roommates with Daishin. Every night after work we would just talk about what we could build on the side, what we could do, how to create a new business. It wasn't a startup back then, it was just, "Let's create a new business while we're young."

Feloni: Why? What do you think drove you to say that?


Eddy Lu and Daishin Sugano at GOAT
Lu and his cofounder Daishin Sugano have been building businesses together since 2007. GOAT
Lu: I don't know. Besides the fact that we always wanted more, for some reason. I left my job in consulting to do banking because I was just kind of bored. It just wasn't stimulating, so I thought doing a banking job would be a lot more rewarding and challenging. There was a lot more work, but it still wasn't challenging to me and us. We just kept talking about other ideas on the side. Working corporate jobs like that, demanding corporate jobs, it's really hard to try to do another business on the side. Daishin and I quit cold turkey on the same day in 2007. We were just, like, "Let's just quit and figure it out." Much to the chagrin of our parents. My dad was very happy I had a Lehman Brothers job. But we just didn't feel like it was right. We wanted to try something while we were young, so we just quit and started to do stuff. Thankfully Daishin is a designer; I was a developer. That was when the iPhone just came out, so we built a bunch of those 99-cent apps.
Feloni: Like games and stuff?

Lu: Games. Little apps. Little to-do apps. All those types of things to just start our startup journey. That's where we started, and we just never looked back, thankfully. It's been a long, painful, meandering road to GOAT.

Feloni: Do you think that you and Daishin would have quit your jobs cold turkey had you guys not had these conversations? Would you have done it on your own if he had not been in your life?

Lu: Having a cofounder you can trust is so important. You hear it all the time; it's really hard to start a startup by yourself. I've seen it through the years, and believe me, Daishin and I have worked through our issues. We're an old, married couple now, but in the beginning, we had physical fights, we've thrown each other to the ground, there was this one time at a restaurant, I remember. We had a disagreement about some business term, and we were yelling at each other at the restaurant — people were looking at us. He got up and walked away, and I kept on barking at him, walking out the door. We totally forgot to pay. We just walked out the door all mad at each other. But we knew that, just right after that, we were just like, "OK, let's just focus again. Let's just get to it." And that's what's really built the company. Resilience is another one of our core values, and it's because we were able to bounce back so quickly from setbacks. Thankfully, since we've been together, and worked through all those issues for so long, now that we're doing GOAT it's just so much easier. We know our lanes, we know what each other's good at, and we just can execute.

Feloni: Yeah, and in the early years, when you were learning ... you had a bunch of odd businesses like golf apparel, those phone apps, high-end tea, the Japanese cream puff things. What were you trying to accomplish? Were you just throwing things at the wall and seeing what stuck?

Lu: What's funny about the cream-puff franchise is that we were building startups on the side, iPhone apps, stuff like that. We were just, like, "Hey, this is a cool, single product. Easy to do concept." Because it's just a single product cream-puff concept.

Feloni: When was this?

Lu: This was right about '07, '08, when we decided to do these things. We were just, like, "This could be great passive income, because we could just put some money in, hire some good managers, and they can operate the stores, and we can have passive income while we build our startup dream." Nothing is ever passive, if you know about the food-service industry. It quickly went from a passive income to something that was pretty hands-on. Especially during the '08 downturn when things were going down. We operated the store a lot; we worked the store. A lot of friends are always saying, "Oh, I would love to own a coffee shop or a restaurant someday." For me it's just, like, no, don't ever do that, because the chance for success is so hard, we quickly learned. Thankfully, we did it while we were young. But those things scale linearly. There's no exponential growth, so it's like you just have to put in capital, you might make a little bit of money, chances are you won't. We learned that tough lesson for those few years because we were in it, it was not passive, we were spending probably 80% of our time doing that, and 20% working on a startup. After a few years, we sold some, we dissolved some, and we just moved on because we just had to cut our losses. It was a great learning lesson while we were young.

Feloni: Why do you think you have that resilience?

Lu: Me, personally? I'm pretty stubborn, I guess. Yeah, I don't know. I was pretty independent growing up. My parents didn't pay for college, they didn't pay for my car; I just kind of had to figure things out when I was growing up. We had a middle-class upbringing. I just had to figure things out and couldn't just fall back on anyone. I think just because of that, I've been pretty stubborn and focused on really making sure things work.

Feloni: Was there ever a moment when you questioned what you were doing and wondered, "Do I need to go back to an office job?"

Lu: How many thousands of moments are we talking about? When we were doing the cream-puff franchise, and it was '09 when the economy wasn't good, and we were in debt. Every kind of debt possible. I was in credit-card debt, in debt to my ex-girlfriend, my girlfriend at the time. It was a lot of pain. I would wake up in the middle of the night with just pangs of guilt, and I was scared, yeah. I don't think Daishin and I ever thought we ... To be honest, going back to a big corporate job just was probably worse than that. I dreaded every Sunday afternoon when I was working at a big corporate job. I never felt that ever since we started doing our whole entrepreneurship journey. I just think it was not going be in the cards. I think we were just foolish and stupid, but we just thought we would just figure it out.