"MacOS Mojave: Everything you need to know
At WWDC 2018, Apple took the name for its Mac operating system down from northern California's majestic mountains and moved southward to the Golden State's famed desert. After a run of mountain themes -- Yosemite, El Capitan, Sierra and High Sierra -- Apple has named the next version of MacOS (version 10.14) after California's Mojave Desert.
MacOS Mojave is available as a preview to developers now, and the public beta will be released in late June. Mojave will be officially released as a free update this fall. It'll introduce a number of new features, from a dark mode and desktop Stacks to a new Finder view and group FaceTime calls. You'll also find four familiar iOS apps on your Mac after updating to Mojave, along with some added privacy features to protect you from Facebook and other advertisers.
Here's everything you need to know about MacOS Mojave. Be sure to check back here regularly; we'll update this article as we track Mojave from its developer preview and public beta stages to its official release this fall.
MacOS Mojave: What you need to know
Is your Mac compatible with Mojave?
How to install MacOS Mojave
MacOS Mojave adds Dark Mode and Desktop Stacks
The 12 best features of MacOS Mojave
Hurray for Safari favicons!
MacOS Mojave and iOS 12 crack down on nosy websites
Control your smart home from your Mac
Apple brings iOS apps into Mac, but won't merge platforms
Get the iOS 12 and MacOS Mojave wallpapers right now
Watch this: Here are Apple's best MacOS Mojave features
1:55
Videos from WWDC 2018: Watch Mojave get introduced
Changing desert light: Mojave has a dark mode
Mojave can organize your cluttered desktop into tidy Stacks
Mojave will make your Mac more secure
Mac App Store gets a makeover
See also
WWDC 2018 highlights little things adding up, especially in iOS 12
No Macs, no iPads leaves us waiting for hardware in September
Here are the biggest iOS 12 features Apple announced at WWDC 2018
Full coverage of WWDC 2018
63
WWDC 2018: Everything from Apple's Worldwide Developers Conference
WWDC 2018
reading
•
MacOS Mojave: Everything you need to know
Jun 18
•
Here's what Apple's doing to get you excited about AR
Jun 14
•
10 hidden features in iOS 12 you need to know
Jun 12
•
iOS 12: What's new with Do Not Disturb and Notifications
•
See All
Share your voice
3 comments
Tags
WWDC 2018 Apple Event Computers Apple"
