How to Enjoy a Luxury Las Vegas Getaway on a Budget
Las Vegas has a reputation for being expensive, but you can enjoy the best it has to offer without emptying your wallet.

If you’re headed to Las Vegas, you don’t have to be a high roller to get the biggest bang for your buck, according to Babs Daitch, a travel consultant at Yankee Clipper Travel.

Ms. Daitch resides in Las Vegas and plans frequent trips to the city for her clients. “If you know some insider tips and the deals to watch for, a lavish Vegas trip can be had for a reasonable price,” she said. She shared some of her best tips for a wallet-friendly trip to Vegas that doesn’t skimp on luxury.

Timing Matters
First, avoid visiting Las Vegas during citywide conventions. Hotel occupancy is higher, which limits your chances of booking a great room, as are nightly rates for hotel rooms all over the city. Las Vegas Tourism’s official site has a calendar of upcoming conventions you should keep an eye on.

In general, hotel rates are the lowest in July and August because the city’s hot weather keeps the crowds away. “If you love hanging out by the pool, these are great months to visit because many of the resorts have fantastic pools,” Ms. Daitch said. Hotel rates also dip after Thanksgiving weekend through early January.

Minimize Your Food Costs
Dinner at many of Las Vegas’s famous restaurants can easily run $150 a person or more. If you’re keen on a meal at one, go during lunch when prices can be more reasonable.

If you prefer to keep your meal options open, or you just want the freedom to try lots of restaurants, buy the Vegas Dining Card from Tix4Tonight. It costs $5 a person for seven days and will save you up to 50 percent at several notable Vegas restaurants including Emeril’s New Orleans Fish House, where you’ll get 20 percent off your food bill, and Planet Hollywood Restaurant and Bar, where you’ll save 50 percent.

Two more dining out tips: First, some restaurants have happy hours with half-priced appetizers. Second, Ms. Daitch enjoys frequenting popular spots at breakfast, when food tends to be the least expensive, yet still freshly prepared and delicious. One of her favorite places for a morning meal is Eggslut at The Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas, which serves creative egg-based sandwiches. “Eating there is a memorable dining experience, but I’m spending only around $10,” she said. Ms. Daitch also suggests  breakfast at Thomas Keller’s Bouchon, at The Venetian.

Drink for Free (or At a Discount)
If you’re a gambler, you’re in store for free drinks, Ms. Daitch said. “Vegas casinos serve free drinks to all gamblers, even at penny slots,” she said. In her experience, the Wynn and the Cosmopolitan offer the best free drinks. But fret not nongamblers: you can find drink discounts of up to 50 percent off usual prices at happy hours offered by bars and restaurants all over the city, including many inside the city’s popular resorts.

Save on Shows and Entertainment
A ticket to one of Vegas’s popular shows can run well into the triple digits, but if you’re open to seeing one last minute, Tix4Tonight lists same-day deals for shows.

The site is updated daily, but a recent example included up to a 50 percent savings on a ticket to the David Copperfield magic show. And, try to avoid seeing the newest and most in-demand shows because these tend to have higher ticket prices, and fewer seating options for groups.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/22/travel/las-vegas-luxury-budget-affordable.html?rref=collection%2Fspotlightcollection%2Ftravel-tips&action=click&contentCollection=travel&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=3&pgtype=collection