LOVERRO: Ovechkin missing Winter Olympics may have saved Stanley Cup win

By Thom Loverro - Thursday, June 14, 2018
ANALYSIS/OPINION:

We have seen a lot of the happy Alex Ovechkin this week — the smiling, laughing, celebrating Alex Ovechkin, the Stanley Cup champion Alex Ovechkin.

But that’s not how the season started. We saw and heard from the angry Alex Ovechkin, the frustrated Alex Ovechkin, the sad Alex Ovechkin, when he issued this statement in late September:

“I wanted to make this statement so that my words are clear and nobody misunderstands what I am saying. The Olympics are in my blood and everybody knows how much I love my country. Ever since I was a kid and all the time I have played in the NHL, NHL players have played in the Olympic Games. We never have to make choice between our team and our country my whole career. I love the Capitals and my teammates here as much as I love my country and I know all the other NHL players feel the same for their teams. We should not have to be in position to make this choice.

“I see the news this week and I am very disappointed that IOC, IIHF and NHL put me and all NHL players in this position when some of the best players in world do not have chance to play in the Olympic Games. This is not just about me but all the NHL players who want to play and have a chance to win gold for their country. Our countries are now not allowed to ask us to play in the Olympics. Me, my teammates and all players who want to go all lose. So do all the fans of hockey with this decision that we are not allowed to be invited. NHL players in the Olympics is good for hockey and good for Olympics. It sucks that will we not be there to play!!

“I said every time I was asked since last Olympics that nobody is going to tell me I can’t play because my country was going to be allowed to ask me. Now the IIHF and NHL say my country is not allowed to ask anybody in the NHL to play and there is nothing to talk about anymore.”

Oh, yes, the Olympics. Remember that? You should. In fact, if you are a Washington Capitals fans, you should cheer NHL commissioner Gary Bettman, instead of the typical practice of booing him, because his decision to not have the league participate in the 2018 Winter Olympics in South Korea may have saved your team the Stanley Cup.
