ROGUE TRADERS Facebook Marketplace is a black market for ILLEGAL knock-off designer goods – including Gucci scarves, Louboutin heels and World Cup footie shirts
Heavily discounted knock-off designer products are being sold on Facebook, despite the practice being ILLEGAL – and against Facebook's own guidelines
FACEBOOK's official Marketplace store has turned into a black market for counterfeit goods, The Sun can reveal.
Rogue traders are using the eBay-style feature to flog knock-off items, including designer clothes, expensive watches and football shirts.
The Sun found more than a dozen sellers using Facebook Marketplace to peddle "replica" items.
These included fake pairs of Christian Louboutin heels, and a Gucci jacket on sale for £40 (which would normally cost thousands of pounds).
One seller, who had been with the site since 2009, was flogging a counterfeit Audemars Piguet watch for £138.
Watches from the ritzy brand would typically cost anywhere from £5,000 to £250,000 and beyond.
Selling counterfeit items is against the law in the UK, as Facebook admits on its own site.
"It's illegal to sell counterfeit items. Facebook doesn't allow counterfeits to be sold on the platform," the company explains.
Facebook describes a counterfeit good as a "knockoff or replica version of another company's product".
"It usually copies the trademark (brand name or logo) and/or distinctive features in order to imitate a genuine product," Facebook says.
Despite Facebook's claims to block the sale of phoney goods however, it's incredibly easy to find counterfeit items on Marketplace.
A simple search for "replica" items brings up countless results, with sellers using Facebook's tool to brazenly push counterfeit clothing to customers.
Speaking to The Sun, Temporary Detective Chief Inspector Nick Court, of the City of London Police's Intellectual Property Crime Unit, said Brits need to be more aware of the laws around the sale of fake goods.
"We are keen to warn those selling counterfeit goods on social media sites that they are committing a crime, and we are actively cracking down on this nationwide.
"In May we visited several people in and around Manchester with plans to target the sellers of counterfeit products in other parts of the UK as well."
The goods found by The Sun were clearly marked as being counterfeit items, but that doesn't make the sale of those items legal.
Worse still, it means Facebook's safety systems are clearly missing goods being openly sold as counterfeit.
One Marketplace user offered a pair of baby blue, crystal-embellished Louboutin high heels for £31 – and described them as "replica" in their post.
The store value of those same shoes is around £5,000, which is a steal, but illegal nonetheless.
This means it's possible (and arguably likely) that there are lots of counterfeit items being sold secretly on Facebook that aren't openly listed as fake.