Sometimes Patients Simply Need Other Patients
Using the internet for a diagnosis is not recommended, but there’s great power in sharing stories.

Image
Cancer survivors gathered on the steps of the Philadelphia Museum of Art during the 2018 Susan G. Komen Philadelphia Race for the Cure celebrations in May.CreditJose F. Moreno/The Philadelphia Inquirer, via Associated Press
Aaron E. CarrollAustin Frakt
By Aaron E. Carroll and Austin Frakt
July 9, 2018

33
When Jodie Ofosuhene learned she had breast cancer at age 29 in 2016, she got more than standard medical care. She was connected with Noel Peters, a former patient who serves as a mentor to new ones. “Noel helped me tremendously,” Ms. Ofosuhene said in an interview. “Every time I had a question about my response to treatment — whether it was normal — she had answers from her own experience.”

In an ideal world, when we are faced with a new health problem, a clinician is available to sit down and address all our questions and anxieties about the condition and its treatment. This ideal is rarely met in the United States health system. More typically, we’re rushed through doctor visits that fly by too quickly for us to gather our thoughts.

Other patients can help. They have (or have had) your condition, as well as your anxieties and questions, and they’ve found a path through. Their journeys can be informative and helpful, and can also help you prepare for the next session with a doctor.

“There’s a lot about the patient experience that doctors and nurses cannot convey because they haven’t gone through it,” Ms. Peters said. “You can get a much better sense of what it means to be a patient from another patient.”

ADVERTISEMENT

We know this from experience. Both of us have health conditions that were once new to us. Aaron wrote about his ulcerative colitis and mental health. Austin has written about his insomnia, minor heart condition and sleep apnea. At first, we sought lots of advice, and not just from doctors. In turn, once we gained experience, we shared what worked and didn’t.

Sharing health stories and learning from one another in an unpaid way (like in-person mentorship, online chats or phone calls) is known as peer health advice or peer-to-peer health care.

You have 4 free articles remaining.

Subscribe to The Times
“After that diagnosis, you get home and you’re alone,” said Susannah Fox, an advocate and scholar of peer-to-peer health care and a former chief technology officer of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. “But you don’t have to be alone.”

The internet has made finding other people with your health problem easier. For example, the Database of Patients’ Experiences is an international collection of videos of patients sharing their experiences about various health conditions.  This kind of sharing is similar to something humans have always done. When we have problems, we discuss them with others. We routinely get advice about where to get our car fixed and which plumber to call, for example.

One in four people receive information or counsel from someone with a similar condition.  Few of us can read everything about our condition. Those who have gone before us can help sift through the mountain of information for what’s most useful. Studies of diabetes management found that those who participated in peer-to-peer health care lowered their blood sugar level more than those who didn’t. Studies of the effect of peer-to-peer health care in a variety of other areas, many of them randomized controlled trials, show the same.

EDITORS’ PICKS

3 Days in Wyoming With Kanye West

Cruises Are So Uncool They Are Cool

How ‘Desus & Mero’ Conquered Late Night
ADVERTISEMENT

Other people’s stories can nudge us into treatment. In response to Austin’s blogging about sleep apnea, several of his colleagues admitted to having or suspecting they had the condition, but not treating it. They said his blogging is encouragement to change that.

Those sharing their stories can also benefit. “It’s very gratifying to help others manage these issues; I know how helpful it can be,” Ms. Peters said. “I didn’t have a mentor to help me through my breast cancer treatment. I was very isolated, sitting home alone by myself. It was very depressing.”

Likewise, when Aaron described his frustrations with the health care system in refilling his medications every three months, it was cathartic, and readers with the same troubles said they felt heard. When Austin wrote about sleep apnea, he received responses with helpful information that changed his mind about which of two reasonable therapies to try first.

It even helps when it’s part of research. When Aaron has conducted focus groups of patients and parents with chronic conditions, like diabetes, many participants reported that the biggest benefit to them was participating, sharing their stories and making connections with others going through the same issues.

Unfortunately, peer-to-peer health care has potential downsides. Peer advice shouldn’t be confused with using the internet for diagnosis, a practice that studies have shown is not very accurate. But online forums for specific conditions are another matter. One study found that only a few out of nearly 5,000 posts on an online breast cancer forum were false.

Peer sharing isn’t always helpful because people can respond differently to treatment. What worked for us may not for you and vice versa. Additionally, in some cases peer sharing can skew perspectives in dangerous ways. Misinformation wrapped up in a personal health care story can have a huge negative impact for all of us. For example, stories about how vaccines are associated with harm, though potentially true in rare instances, do not imply that vaccines cause more harm than good. In fact, vaccines cause much, much more good than harm.

“If it’s high stakes, if you need an accurate diagnosis for a serious condition, you should see a professional,” Ms. Fox said. “But for emotional support or a quick remedy for a minor issue, peers can be extremely helpful.”

ADVERTISEMENT

A 2010 national survey of adults by the Pew Research Center backs this up. People prefer to see professionals for an accurate medical diagnosis; information about prescription drugs; and information about alternative treatments. But they turn to nonprofessionals for support or advice on an everyday health problem. Users of PatientsLikeMe, an online patient community, also reported that engaging with other patients on the site improved their understanding of their conditions.

It’s also possible that people could use the information you write about to discriminate against you or treat you badly. Of course, anytime you put something online you risk encountering trolls and unkind people.

One thing that isn’t the risk that many might think is underwriting, or not being able to get health care coverage because of pre-existing conditions. That’s largely gone now because of the Affordable Care Act. But even when it existed (or if/when it does again), you’re not going to hide your health conditions from an insurer. You usually have to provide the insurer with access to your medical records. Eventually, they’ll find the truth, whether you’ve written about it online or not.

A new diagnosis or big change in health can be frightening. In such circumstances, we often have a lot of questions, but we may not know the range of possibilities for treatment or where to start. The health system can be helpful, but too often it isn’t. A little help from friends can go a long way.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/09/upshot/sometimes-patients-simply-need-other-patients.html