New iPhones, iPad Pros, Mac Mini and more: Is this Apple's 2018 lineup?
Apple is predicted to have a busy year ahead of it.

Frequent Apple commentator Ming-Chi Kuo published a research note on Wednesday with his predictions for Apple's fall 2018 hardware lineup, as spotted by 9to5Mac. Kuo has a long track record of making numerous and accurate Apple predictions. Still, this should be taken with a grain of salt.

Some of his predictions include three new iPhones, a new Mac Mini, the AirPower charger and more. Here's a breakdown of all the predicted new devices:

Three new iPhones: a 5.8-inch OLED iPhone, a 6.5-inch OLED iPhone Plus and a 6.1-inch affordable LCD iPhone
Two new iPads: 12.9- and 11-inch iPad Pros (both rumored to have FaceID and no home button)
New Macs: a new MacBook, a MacBook Pro, an iMac and the return of the Mac Mini (Kuo also predicts that Apple will replace the outdated MacBook Air with a new budget laptop model)
Two new Apple Watches: one with a 1.57-inch display, the other with a 1.78-inch display (both with enhanced heart rate detection)
Apple may release its wireless charger AirPower, having announced the device last September
Updated AirPods
That's an enormous amount for Apple to release by the end of the year. We'll find out if this lineup is accurate in the coming months.

Apple didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.

  Taboola Sponsored Links by  YOU MAY ALSO LIKE
This Woman Reads 100 Books A Month
Sponsored by Blinkist
If you own a Computer then you have to try this Game
Sponsored by Delta Wars
10 Countries That Don’t Want You To Visit
Sponsored by Bored Articles
People from Vietnam cannot believe these flight prices
Sponsored by Trips Shop
My own fight against homophobia, biphobia and transphobia in football goes back a long way. I joined my local club, Horley Town, when I was 11. I soon found I couldn’t bond with my teammates, an experience replicated when I played, once, for my school. I didn’t play competitively again until I joined the Brighton Bandits, a team on the English South Coast who were part of the world’s only national L.G.B.T. football league, the Gay Football Supporters’ Network League.

At the time, some friends asked why such segregation was necessary. I told them the truth, which was that L.G.B.T. people were unlikely to socialize in the same places as straight teammates and would feel nervous about disclosing same-sex relationships. They had good reason to: Managers such as the English legend Brian Clough and the former Croatian boss Otto Baric publicly denounced gay players. Homophobic chants remain the norm.

After my first Bandits match in 2008, I talked to a teammate about Justin Fashanu, who in 1990 became the first (and at the time only) professional player to come out as gay. As the 10th anniversary of Fashanu’s death approached, nobody was discussing it. In part this was because his life was so complicated, and his death — he committed suicide after being accused of sexual assault — so traumatic. But it felt like an impediment to a wider conversation about the gulf between L.G.B.T. fans and professional football.

This is your last free article.

Subscribe to The Times
It was not Fashanu’s only problem, but he suffered from prejudice before and after coming out, so we adopted his name for The Justin Campaign against homophobia in football.

Later, the campaign rebranded as Football v. Homophobia and became an important agent in anti-discrimination initiatives, running workshops for clubs and organizations across Europe about how to create an environment where a professional player might feel able to come out and where fans might be able to challenge the perception that L.G.B.T. people weren’t harmed by homophobic behavior. Though I had left the campaign to begin my gender transition — I had a lot to sort out — its work was vital in spreading the tenets and techniques of inclusion.

But there’s so far to go. Issues like how to include trans players in men’s or women’s divisions have been left to national associations, even though, as the International Olympic Committee urges, they should be allowed to compete without restriction. And despite FIFA’s heartening willingness to engage with activist groups, most of its initiatives have focused on “diversity” rather than concrete actions on L.G.B.T. inclusion.

