SICK CAT BEATING Horrific injuries of cat repeatedly hurled against pavement by ‘scum of the earth’ thug in brutal attack

Kameere the cat suffered a fractured skull and such severe damage to one her eyes that it might be removed

A CAT suffered horrific injuries when it was hurled against a pavement by a thug during a brutal attack.

Kameere the cat suffered a fractured skull and such severe damage to one eye that it might be removed.

Owner Michelle Bartle is devastated and called the attacker the “scum of the earth”.

The shocking incident happened outside Michelle's home in Glenrothes, Fife.

She said it left her feeling “physically sick and shaking uncontrollably”.

"I heard screaming outside, not like the usual cat fight. I went and looked outside and there was a man in black lifting her up and throwing her off the ground."

She added: "I started screaming out the window. I shouted down to Andrew. By the time he ran outside the man was gone.

“The terrified and badly injured cat had crawled away from the scene and was not found for several minutes."

Michelle added: “My son, Scott, is 16. He was 6 months old when we got Kameere so he has grown up his whole life with her.

“He found her in the grass after what happened. He was white as a sheet."

At the vets, the cat had to be heavily sedated and had stitching to a haemorrhaging eye.

CCTV shows the man walking past a fence near the family home about five minutes before the attack.

Michelle has appealed for help by members of the public to trace the man.

A GoFundMe page has also been set up by Michelle's sister Jay-Marie to support Kameere's vet bills which are "likely to run into the thousands".

Michelle added: “If he can do that to a cat what else is he capable of?

“He’s the absolute scum of the Earth."

She added: “Kameere didn’t act like she was 15-years-old. She was such a little character. Now she’s going to struggle jumping up and down, climbing trees."

Police are investigating the incident, and are keen to speak to members of the public who may have seen the man before the attack or afterwards when he fled in the direction of Glenwood Shopping Centre.

Sergeant Kirk Donnelly from Glenrothes Police Station said: "This is an absolutely sickening and violent attack on a defenceless animal, that has left the cat with very serious injuries.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6703940/horrific-cat-injuries-hurled-against-pavement-attack/