How popular is Donald Trump? Latest polls, approval ratings and impeachment odds.


Donald Trump's approval ratings have climbed to levels not seen since before his botched attempt to repeal Obamacare according to the Telegraph's poll tracker.

The tracker, which takes an average of the last eight polls, put Trump's approval rating on 44 per cent at the end of May. The last time this figure was so high was on 14 March 2017 - the week before legislation to repeal Obamacare failed to pass and two months prior Comey's controversial dismissal.

The period since Donald Trump's election has been packed with controversy and intrigue but, underneath it all, few people seem to have really changed their minds about America's 45th President.

His approval rating quickly slumped in the chaotic days after assuming office, with Trump achieving a majority disapproval rating in a record of just eight days. A year in, he is far less popular than previous presidents at this stage of a presidency.


But Donald Trump smashed this record after surging into the White House on a wave of anti-establishment anger.

It took just eight days for him to gain a majority disapproval rating, according to Gallup, with 51 per cent of Americans saying they disapproved of the President on January 28, 2016.

Trump has faced persistent allegations over Russian connections, fired the head of the FBI, launched tirades against the media, failed to push through healthcare reform and has escalated his rhetoric surrounding North Korea.

However, while there has been an overall drop in public opinion, the President's approval ratings have remained relatively stable since July, even an uptick following his handling of the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville and Hurricane Irma.

Indeed, his popularity has actually risen over the past year among certain segments of the population.

Among those who self-identify as being conservatives - although not necessarily Republicans - his approval rating is actually marginally higher than it was at the start of the year according to YouGov, while, importantly, he is liked better by people who are registered to vote. His approval rating among registered voters hasn't dropped below 40 per cent all year.

America's politics is so extreme that his popularity among Democrats can't really drop any further, while Republicans seemingly refuse to desert him no matter what he does.

What are the latest impeachment odds for Trump?
As it stands impeachment is still unlikely because it would require a majority in the House of Representatives to go to trial and a two-thirds majority in the Senate to make it happen.

Both the House and the Senate are currently under Republican control, meaning that Trump's party would have to abandon him for him to be kicked out of office.

However, the bookmakers aren't ruling out impeachment with the latest odds from Ladbrokes showing that there is a chance Trump will fail to make it to the end of his first term in office.

Their latest odds are as follows:

Impeachment or resignation before 2020: 6/4
To serve full first term: 4/7
