Stan Wawrinka claims much-needed win with victory over Cameron Norrie at Queen's

The triple grand-slam champion Stan Wawrinka became the latest big name to welcome Andy Murray back to the tennis tour on Monday night. “It’s never easy when you don’t see a player like him on the court,” said Wawrinka. “You’re not used to it.”

But first Wawrinka had business of his own to attend to, as he claimed only his fifth victory of 2018 over British No. 2 Cameron Norrie. Wawrinka is still in the middle of his own comeback from injury, having undergone two knee operations last year. On Monday, he significantly reduced the amount of running he had to do by belting down 13 aces in a quickfire 6-2, 6-3 win.

Wawrinka was aggressive in his returns too, striking a couple of clean forehand winners that flew past Norrie almost before he had completed his service action. Afterwards, he admitted that he had found this victory particularly satisfying in the light of his recent drought, which has seen him win only one match since the first half of February.

“Mentally, it's tough when you see how far you are and how long it will take,” said Wawrinka, when asked about his slow march back to a competitive level. “I need to be really patient with myself, to accept less in a way.

“I improved a lot physically and I am getting closer at least in the practice court. But I know that the next few months will not be easy. So I just need to take every match, every win as something really positive and keep doing the right job every day.”

Tuesday’s centre-court schedule at the Fever-Tree Championships looks like a crowd-pleaser, featuring not only Murray but Novak Djokovic and the new British No. 1 Kyle Edmund. Meanwhile, Dan Evans will be in action on Court 1 against Adrian Mannarino, on the same day that the All England are due to discuss whether to offer him a wild card.

For the second time in a fortnight, Evans was the subject of a letter of support on Monday from Toby Perkins, the Chesterfield MP who is a member of the All Party Parliamentary Group on Tennis. Perkins wrote to Wimbledon’s chief executive Richard Lewis to suggest that Evans is a deserving case.
