Exclusive: U.S. EPA grants biofuels waiver to billionaire Icahn's oil refinery - sources
Jarrett Renshaw, Chris Prentice
NEW YORK (Reuters) - The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has granted a financial hardship waiver to an oil refinery owned by billionaire Carl Icahn, a former adviser to President Donald Trump, exempting the Oklahoma facility from requirements under a federal biofuels law, according to two industry sources briefed on the matter.
The waiver enables Icahn’s CVR Energy Inc (CVI.N) to avoid tens of millions of dollars in costs related to the U.S. Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) program. The regulation is meant to cut air pollution, reduce petroleum imports and support corn farmers by requiring refiners to mix billions of gallons of biofuels into the nation’s gasoline and diesel each year.
The Small Refiners Coalition, which represents companies that operate small refining facilities, said the EPA is required by law to help small refineries struggling with these regulations and that such exemptions are crucial to their financial well-being. It applauded EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt for protecting small refineries, regardless of ownership, from the RFS requirements.
But the exemption for CVR’s Wynnewood, Oklahoma plant prompted criticism from a corn state lawmaker and the powerful corn lobby, which has already accused Trump’s EPA of overusing the hardship waiver program in a way that hurts demand for ethanol.
“Hundreds of millions - and in some cases billions - of dollars in profits isn’t my definition of ‘hardship,’” Iowa Republican Senator Chuck Grassley said in statement condemning the CVR waiver. “President Trump promised to support home-grown biofuels, and Administrator Pruitt is breaking that promise.”
“This one’s going to be hard for Pruitt to explain,” Brooke Coleman, head of the Advanced Biofuels Business Council industry group, said in an email.
EPA spokeswoman Liz Bowman said that the agency does not comment on specific refineries. “But, what I can tell you is that the criteria used to grant waivers has not changed since previous administrations,” Bowman added.
CVR spokeswoman Brandee Stephens declined to comment regarding the waiver. Efforts to reach Icahn and his attorney for comment were not successful.
An early supporter of Trump’s 2016 presidential run and a key supporter on Wall Street, Icahn had met with Pruitt when Pruitt was being vetted in late 2016 for the EPA administrator job, according to news reports at the time.
Icahn stepped down from his position as special regulatory adviser to the Republican president last August after lawmakers cited potential ethical problems in his dual role as an adviser and an investor.
Icahn is currently under investigation by the U.S. Justice Department for his role in influencing biofuels policy while serving as Trump’s adviser. Some U.S. lawmakers have expressed concern that Icahn may have used his presidential access to benefit his investments, a charge Icahn has rejected.
The EPA has said it has granted more than two dozen waivers for 2017 but has declined to name the recipients.
Under Trump’s Democratic predecessor Barack Obama, the EPA granted about eight waivers annually.
Records show CVR had been denied on at least one occasion. The Small Refiners Coalition said the Obama administration had wrongly denied waivers to firms like CVR.
Reuters has reported that Andeavor (ANDV.N), one of America’s biggest refining companies, which reported about $1.5 billion in net profit last year, was among the other companies that have received hardship waivers from Trump’s EPA for its small refineries.

