Maybe the match you want to see was played while you were sleeping. Maybe you want to see that stunning shootout all over again. Here’s how to watch matches after they’ve aired.

The World Cup only happens every four years, so it’s particularly painful when you can’t catch the big games. Maybe you’re stuck in meetings at work all day, or maybe your time zone just isn’t compatible with Russia’s. You can still enjoy those games after they’ve aired, as long as you avoid spoilers.

Record the Game at Home — Even If You Don’t Have Cable
Most people in this predicament would immediately reach for their DVR remote, and that’s obviously a great solution. If your cable subscription came with a DVR that can schedule recordings, you’re good to go: Just set it up before you leave, and you can watch the games from your couch later on.

If you don’t have cable, though — and don’t want to buy a separate DVR — you can still record shows through other means. Live-streaming TV services like Sling, DirecTV Now and Hulu Live have cloud DVR features that let you record shows for later. If you miss a recording, they’ll usually re-air the game again the next day, so you get another chance at recording it. These services cost around $30 to $40 a month depending on the channels you subscribe to.

Alternatively, if you have a TV tuner hooked up to your computer, you can record the games with the Plex Media Server program and a $5-per-month Plex Pass subscription. Once the games are recorded, you can watch them on any device that has the Plex app installed. (It’s available for Windows and Mac computers, iPhone, iPad, Google Android devices and many set-top boxes and smart TVs.) TV tuners come as cheaply as $50 and can be installed internally or plugged into a USB port on your computer.

Finally, you might have DVR functionality built into your TV and not even know it. Some TVs — particularly those in Europe and other  places outside the United States — allow you to plug a USB drive into the back and record shows right to the drive with little hassle. If you have an antenna hooked up to your TV and a compatible drive, you can set this up in minutes and have the game waiting for you when you get back. Check your TV’s manual for more information.

Stream Previous Games Anytime, Anywhere
If you want to watch a game from your phone or tablet — even after it’s aired — you have a few options for that, as well. First, you can stream all the previous games on foxsports.com using your phone or set-top box of choice. You will, however, need to enter credentials for a cable provider, like Comcast or AT&T, to access them.

Alternatively, if you’ve recorded a game using a streaming service (like the aforementioned Sling or DirecTV Now), you should be able to stream those cloud DVR recordings to your phone or tablet no matter where you are. Just download the service’s app and sign into your account. Plex also allows you to watch recordings away from home, provided the computer with the Plex Media Server (which  has your game recording stored on it) is turned on back home.

Some streaming services, like Hulu Live, allow you to watch full replays after a game has aired, even if you didn’t DVR it. Some will block you from fast forwarding, though, so if you can remember to record the game to your cloud DVR, that’s usually a better option.

Keep Up with the Scores and Highlights When You Can’t Watch
If you don’t have time to watch a full game but still want to keep up with the score (or see highlights after it’s over), the official World Cup app is great. You can pick your favorite teams and get notifications whenever a goal is made, a card is given, a period ends or a lineup changes. You can open the app to see live updating scores during the game, along with a feed of key moments (like goals and cards), statistics and more. It’s the best way to “watch” the game without actually watching it.

If you don’t have the app handy, Google’s World Cup portal is almost as good. Just search Google for “World Cup,” and you’ll see a box at the top of the search results with a list of the day’s matches, including current scores and a video highlight reel if the game is over. If you click on the game you’re interested in, you’ll get a detailed feed similar to the World Cup app’s, including information about who scored which goals, when those goals were scored, yellow cards, substitutions and how much time is left — not to mention historical insights about the matchup. It’s not the same as watching it live, but in a pinch, it’ll do the trick.