VOLTS WAGEN Electric Volkswagen wins US mountain race — here’s four we’ll be driving soon
Dieselgate had people claiming Volkswagen was kaput — but the German geniuses have reinvented themselves as an electric car pioneer
JUST three years ago, perfectly intelligent human beings were claiming: Volkswagen is kaput.
Dieselgate had shredded its public image and emptied its coffers.
But not only has VW survived the emissions crisis, it has reinvented itself as an electric car pioneer.
Last weekend VW showed America — the country that fined it £22.9billion — what it can do with a battery and a big wing.
It obliterated the course record at Pikes Peak — America’s second-oldest race — and not just for electric cars, but for petrol cars too.
Now you may be thinking, “Great, but of what relevance is that to me in County Durham?”
Quite a lot, actually.
The ID R race car is the forerunner to VW’s new ID family of pure electric cars, which launch as early as next year.
VW’s mission is to have 20 ID models and sell one million electric cars a year by 2025.
You could probably double that with all the electric cars coming from VW Group brands Audi, Seat, Skoda and Porsche.
I should add at this point that VW has been selling EVs since 2013 (e-Golf and e-up!) but Dieselgate clearly accelerated its switch to e-mobility.
Now excuse me for a moment while I nerd out.
Pikes Peak — otherwise known as “the race to the clouds” — is a legendary balls-to-the-wall mountain race: one attempt, 12.42 miles, 156 corners and a 4,720ft climb to the finish at 14,115ft. That’s high.
The ID R — which accelerates faster than an F1 car — averaged 90mph, smashing the eight-minute barrier for the first time.
Many said that Sebastien Loeb’s 2013 record in a petrol-powered Peugeot 208 T16 would never be beaten — but fellow Frenchman Romain Dumas blitzed it by 16 seconds. The peaky blinder.
Another electric car will go even lower one day — but there’s very little chance a petrol car will ever beat it.
Why? Because of the effects of altitude. Thin air sucks the power out of combustion engines, by as much as 40 per cent.
But not so with electric cars — they can use maximum power all the way to the top.
VW motorsport boss Sven Smeets said: “You can see where the future is going.
“We are the first to win with an electric car in an open competition — and there’s more to come. We are just at the start with this technology.
“This project is a demonstration of what the ID family will be, and what R will be, in the future.
“We can take some things from this and bring them to e-mobility for normal road cars.”
You can see the ID R at Goodwood Festival of Speed next month.