Donald Trump: 'I have the absolute right to pardon myself'


Donald Trump has insisted he has an “absolute right" to pardon himself and called the special counsel leading the Russia probe “totally unconstitutional” in an escalating attack on those investigating him. 

The US president suggested he would not use the power because he had “done nothing wrong” but the declaration will be seen as a shot across the bows to those looking into obstruction of justice claims. 

Mr Trump’s lawyer Rudy Giuliani went a step further by saying even if the president shot James Comey, the former FBI director he sacked, he could not be prosecuted. 

The attempts to play up Mr Trump’s constitutional power come as Robert Mueller, the special counsel, looks into whether the president obstructed justice by trying to influence the Russia investigation. 

A leaked memo from Mr Trump’s legal team showed they were arguing that it is impossible for the president to obstruct justice as he is America’s chief law enforcement officer, and therefore would be obstructing himself. 

Mr Trump tweeted on Monday about his legal powers and repeated criticism of Mr Mueller’s team, who he has framed as favouring the Democrats, his political opponents. 

He wrote: “As has been stated by numerous legal scholars, I have the absolute right to PARDON myself, but why would I do that when I have done nothing wrong? 

“In the meantime, the never ending Witch Hunt, led by 13 very Angry and Conflicted Democrats (& others) continues into the mid-terms!"

Mr Trump later tweeted: “The appointment of the Special Councel is totally UNCONSTITUTIONAL! Despite that, we play the game because I, unlike the Democrats, have done nothing wrong!”

Over the weekend Mr Giuliani, a former New York mayor, said that while Mr Trump could face impeachment – a political process to remove him from office - he not be indicted or subpoenaed. 

He told the Huffington Post:  "I don't know how you can indict while he's in office. No matter what it is.”

Mr Giuliani went on: “If he shot James Comey, he'd be impeached the next day. Impeach him, and then you can do whatever you want to do to him." 

The assertions about the legal powers of the presidency, questioned by some constitutional lawyers, are relevant given Mr Trump is refusing a request for be interviewed by the Russia investigation.  

It is possible that Mr Mueller could attempt to force him to give evidence by a subpoena, but Mr Trump’s team has indicated they would fight such an attempt.

The clash is likely to come to a head over the summer, given Mr Giuliani is pushing for the obstruction of justice element of Mr Mueller’s inquiry to be wrapped up by September. 

Mr Trump has already accused the special counsel of “meddling” in the midterm elections, which will take place this November. 

The president’s allies have urged Mr Mueller to avoid what happened to Mr Comey, who handled the Hillary Clinton email scandal before the 2016 presidential election and was accused of influencing the race. 

There was some backlash on Capitol Hill to Mr Trump’s pardon statement. Chuck Grassley, a Republican senator for Iowa, said: “If I were President of the United States and I had a lawyer that told me I could pardon myself, I think I would hire a new lawyer.”

Adam Schiff, a Democratic congressman from California, tweeted: “President Nixon asked the Department of Justice if he could pardon himself. They said no, as no one may be the judge in their own case. He resigned three days later.” 