America's youth finally destroyed slacktivism
Hundreds of thousands of young children, teenagers, parents, and concerned people across the U.S. stepped away from their computer screens and left their houses on March 24, gathering in the streets to protest against gun violence in the March for Our Lives.

It would have been much easier just to sign an online petition or tweet with the march's trending hashtag — in other words, engage in "slacktivism," or simple activism efforts that require little action and, ultimately, have little impact. But after 17 people were killed in the Feb. 14 school shooting in Parkland, Florida, these Americans couldn't sit back and value the convenience of slacktivism over the dire need to go out and create real change.
Ever since President Donald Trump was elected in November 2016, his harmful rhetoric and the administration's policies have inspired protests to advocate for women's rights, support immigrants and members of the LGBTQ community, and fight for better health care, among other causes. Marches and demonstrations are becoming more and more common — and they're getting bigger.

The March for Our Lives protest, organized by the student survivors of Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, is just the latest proof that over the past year-and-a-half, young, engaged Americans have started regularly going above and beyond a hashtag to get their voices heard.

The idea for March for Our Lives, which ended up being one of the biggest youth-led protests in American history, was conceived by students less than a week after the Parkland shooting. The tragedy quickly prompted social media support in the form of hashtags like #EnoughIsEnough, #NeverAgain, and #ParklandStrong.

But rather than allowing the hashtags to simply dissolve into slacktivist efforts, as was the case with so many issues before, the teens continued to raise their voices.
We've seen slacktivism a lot over the past several years. Think back to 2012, when the Kony 2012 video made waves on social media. The viral video highlighted the need to end violence in central Africa, asking for donations to take down militia leader Joseph Kony. Viewers were urged to like and share the video, using the hashtag #Kony2012. But when it came down to it, that's all they were doing to stop the problem.
A similar occurrence took place in 2014 with the rise of the Ice Bucket Challenge. Though much-needed money was raised to fund research for the degenerative neurological disorder ALS, many people simply wanted to join the trend of raising awareness. They thought that by posting funny videos of themselves being doused with ice water, they were raising awareness of the issue and therefore had done their parts.

In wake of the Parkland shooting, student survivors could have easily limited their efforts to sharing supportive hashtags and raising awareness of the need for gun control on Twitter, but they kept up the momentum, engaged others, and went out into the world to take tangible action.

The young activists gave interviews, penned op-eds, made music, and held a statement-making CNN town hall to challenge and question the National Rifle Association and politicians like Senator Marco Rubio. 

Their tireless month spent organizing and inspiring other students, teachers, and faculty members at schools across America paid off when thousands of students across the nation walked out of their schools for 17 minutes to honor of the 17 lives of those killed in Parkland.

Then, as a further signal of the end of slacktivism, more than 1 million people across the country organized and attended more than 800 March for Our Lives events on March 24 in protest of gun violence. They chanted. They made signs. And they took concrete steps to get out into the world as activists.
The response to the Parkland shooting isn't the first time we've seen massive numbers of people abandon slacktivism to fight for change in the Trump era.

Just one day after Donald Trump was inaugurated in January 2016, hundreds of thousands of people gathered around the world to march in support of women's rights and protest the new president. The peaceful Women's Marches took place in 160 cities across 60 countries, and crowds rivaled those at Trump's inauguration. The marches resumed on the 2018 inauguration anniversary, too.


In Trump's first few months in office, the political resistance grew, and emerging from online safe spaces seemed to become contagious. Rather than simply using hashtags and sharing informative articles, we saw more and more people speak up and take part in concrete activist efforts and protests.

When Trump signed an executive order preventing people from Muslim-majority countries, including legal residents and valid visa holders, from immigrating to America, people flocked to airports across the U.S. in protest. And thousands of science enthusiasts showed up at more than 500 March for Science events across the world to argue the importance of fighting to preserve our planet and prioritizing facts.
Women took part in "A Day Without a Woman," a peaceful protest planned by the organizers of the Women's March in which women stayed home from work, did not tweet, and refrained from carrying out their usual contributions to the world for a day. And businesses shut down to show support for their employees on A Day Without Immigrants.

From University of Notre Dame students who didn't support Mike Pence's anti-LGBTQ policies walking out of his commencement address, to people dressing as characters from The Handmaid's Tale in protest of anti-abortion bills, and NFL players refusing to stand for the national anthem in protest of police brutality and the nation's treatment of black people, outspoken activism in the Trump era has almost become par for the course. 
And in Hollywood, celebrities went from using the #MeToo hashtag on Twitter and wearing black at awards ceremonies to bringing activists as dates, using acceptance speeches to touch on social issues, and creating Time's Up — an initiative dedicated to providing legal assistance and fighting sexual harassment across all industries.

Efforts have even been made to allow people who are unable to physically attend protests to participate. A virtual march was created to make the Women's March more accessible to people with disabilities, and Tumblr recently partnered with Everytown for Gun Safety to give people tools to express themselves and a place to march digitally.

The Stoneman Douglas students have already started to have a real impact on society and the culture around guns. Aside from drawing massive crowds around the world, Florida Governor Rick Scott signed a bill earlier this month, raising the age of a person allowed to purchase a firearm to 21 years old.

Another National School Walkout is planned for April 20 to mark the 19-year anniversary of the Columbine High School shooting, and as determined students begin to turn 18 years old and exercise their rights to vote, they can begin using their voices to participate in the November midterm elections and beyond.

This recent shift to real action is inspiring, but it's so easy for slacktivism to rear its ugly ahead again if people fall back into lazy habits and grow complacent with doing the bare minimum. We'll have to wait and see if this is actually the new norm.

But if protests continue to inspire younger generations to use their voices and push for change, maybe one day slacktivism will truly be a thing of the past.