Women's Tour organisers hoping race will be on live TV 'in next two to three years'

Heath Harvey, chief executive of Women's Tour organisers SweetSpot, has described live television coverage as “the final frontier” for the race, adding that he wants to see it introduced “in the next two to three years”.

The fifth edition of the race ended on Sunday with Sunweb’s Coryn Rivera crowned champion in Colwyn Bay. With big crowds turning up each day, a total prize pot of €90,000 – equal with the men’s Tour of Britain – plus a nightly highlights programme on ITV4, the race once again won plenty of plaudits.

The continued lack of any live coverage, however, was a source of frustration to many. Crowds lining the route were largely in the dark about the race situation unfolding around them, with only intermittent Twitter updates from teams and organisers to keep them up to date.

“Absolutely,” Harvey replied when asked whether live coverage was the final piece of the jigsaw. “I agree with that comment completely. Our focus is definitely on trying to achieve that in the next two to three years.

“Obviously in the immediate future we want to consolidate and improve upon all the work we’ve done in the last five years. We’d like to add a sixth day [to the race]. And whilst we’re doing that we’ll also be working on the finances that underpin the event. Because unfortunately live TV comes at an enormous cost... but yes, the end goal is to have live TV like we do in the men’s race.”

SweetSpot did investigate the possibility of streaming the race this year, using 3G or 4G, Harvey said. However, many of the areas visited by the race had limited signal. Drones have also been looked at. The end goal, though, is to broadcast the race live using established techniques.

“It’s circa £100,000 per day to create a live show,” Harvey said. “You need cameras on the ground feeding to a helicopter and then a plane above that. So it’s a lot of infrastructure. But we’ll get there.

“If you look at the evolution of the men’s race, it didn’t happen on day one. The race grew in terms of the number of stages. And then a highlights programme became a live programme. And then the live programme went from three days to five days. There was definitely an evolutionary process.

“I bet you anything that the start gun to live TV [for the women’s race] will be half the time it took the men’s race.

“I also think there’s a relationship between what you desire and what your product’s worth. I think there has been an acceptance over the last five years of the quality of the [Women’s Tour] product. The coverage and the audience is growing and it’s incredibly exciting for us as owners that that appetite is growing.”
