Owls See the World Much Like We Do
Barn owls have simpler brains than primates, but they can process information about things moving 
in their environment in a similarly complex way.
Owl eyes are round, but not spherical. These immobile, tubular structures sit on the front of an 
owl’s face like a pair of built-in binoculars. They allow the birds to focus in on prey and see in 
three dimensions, kind of like humans — except we don’t have to turn our whole heads to spot a slice 
of pizza beside us.
Although owls and humans both have binocular vision, it has been unclear whether these birds of prey 
process information they collect from their environments like humans, because their brains aren’t 
as complex. But in a study published in the Journal of Neuroscience on Monday, scientists tested 
the ability of barn owls to find a moving target among various shifting backgrounds, a visual 
processing task earlier tested only in primates.
The research suggests that barn owls, with far simpler brains than humans and other primates, also 
group together different elements as they move in the same direction,  to make sense of the world 
around them.
“Humans are not so different from birds as you may think,” said Yoram Gutfreund, a neuroscientist 
at Technion Israel Institute of Technology who led the study with colleagues from his university 
and RWTH Aachen University in Germany.
A critical part of perception is being able to distinguish an object from its background. One way 
humans do this is by grouping elements of a scene together to perceive each part as a whole. In 
some cases, that means combining objects that move similarly, like birds flying in a flock, or the 
single bird that breaks away from it.
Scientists have generally considered this type of visual processing as a higher level task that 
requires complex brain structures. As such, they’ve only studied it in humans and primates.
But Dr. Gutfreund and his team believed this ability was more basic — like seeing past camouflage. 
A barn owl, for example, might have evolved a similar mechanism to detect a mouse moving in a 
meadow as wind blows the grass in the same direction.
To test visual detection tactics in their feathered subjects, they showed barn owls screens of 
black, moving dots on a gray background and attached cameras to their heads to track their gazes. 
Then the team measured how long it took the birds to turn their heads toward a target dot, moving 
in a different direction than numerous other shifting dots.