2017 was a good year for LGBTQ cinema – if you knew where to look
2017’s great year of LGBTQ filmmaking doesn’t start and end with Call Me By Your Name, Luca Guadagnino’s dreamy, sun-dappled tale of summer romance. If laden glances between Oliver and Elio have whetted your appetite for queer stories on the big screen, the last 12 months have had a lot to offer. 
You just needed to venture outside the multiplex to find it.
The queer hits of 2017
The multiplex was home, for a time, to Angela Robinson’s Professor Marston and the Wonder Women, about the polyamorous relationship between Wonder Woman co-creator William Moulton Marton (Luke Evans) and the two loves of his (and each other's) lives. Tender, bold, timely (hi, Wonder Woman origin story!), and unabashedly sexy, Professor Marston seemed to have “success” written all over it. 
And then it flopped, opening in domestic theatres to under a million dollars before slinking out of rotation entirely after six weeks. All this despite the presence of Rebecca Hall. American moviegoers: I’m disappointed in you.
Despite the fate of Professor Marston, there is still a thriving market for LGBTQ cinema. Call Me By Your Name, sitting just shy of $2 million at the domestic box office as of this writing, is one example. 
Francis Lee’s God’s Own Country, a Yorkshire-set romance about a taciturn shepherd’s son (Josh O’Connor) and the Romanian refugee (a swoonworthy Alec Secareanu) hired to help him with lambing season, is another. 
God’s Own Country’s Sundance bow was followed several months later by the beginning of its theatrical run in the UK, where this low-budget movie with no A-list stars proved quite the indie powerhouse.
“It came out on 45 screens, and it had the highest per-theatre average of that weekend,” noted Lee. The film “generated an audience through word of mouth that was not a gay male audience. And it did cross over—it became a box office hit. It just kept building and building. In a lot of those theatres, it became their biggest-selling film of the year.” 
That “core audience” of gay men loved Lee’s vision and supported it so much that it found wider support—which is evidence enough that the existence of personal queer stories, authentically told, isn’t something that will inherently turn mainstream audiences away.
Studio films are still sorely lacking in LGBTQ representation
Which makes the LGBTQ representation to be found in 2017’s studio tentpoles even more galling. There wasn’t much of it, first off. And what there was by and large half-assed. Call it a remix of 2016, which gave us “not-quite-gay” characters in Ghostbusters, Finding Dory, and Independence Day: Resurgence.
Films like Beauty and the Beast, Power Rangers, and Alien: Covenant gave us characters who were kindasortamaybe in same-sex relationships — holding the dread specter of (gasp) queerness at arm’s length lest some homophobes in one of the all-important four quadrants get upset. 
The fact that these films are willing to admit that gay people exist is a step in the right direction ... but a downright microscopic step.
In Power Rangers, Yellow Ranger Trini (Becky G) is asked if she has “boyfriend problems.” When she declines to answer, a fellow Ranger follows up: “Girlfriend problems?” And with that, the moment passes: an acknowledgement, not that Trini is queer, but that queer people exist in the first place and that Trini might (might) be one of them. Congratulations? 
In Alien: Covenant, you probably didn’t realize colonists Lope (Demián Bichir) and Hallett (Nathaniel Dean) were in a relationship unless you read about it or watched the prologue, which saw them engaging in a bit of light canoodling. 
Beauty and the Beast, of course, had their “exclusively gay moment,” which amounted to LeFou (Josh Gad) making eyes at Gaston (Luke Evans) before ending up paired with a different man for a brief moment in the film’s big ballroom finale. "Gay villain" trope: Check. “Gay man pining after his straight best friend” trope: Check again. 
Meanwhile, Thor: Ragnarok omitted reference to Valkyrie’s (Tessa Thompson) canonical comics bisexuality altogether. 
... But indie cinema has been picking up the slack across a range of queer identities
The fact that these films are willing to admit that gay people exist is a step in the right direction ... but a downright microscopic step, tiny enough to verge on the insulting. That’s especially true when you look at the healthy handful of smaller films that tackle varying facets of the LGBTQ experience in an authentic, forthright way. 
Films like Damon Cardasis’ Saturday Church, a sparkling coming-of-age musical about a teenage boy (Luka Kain) from the Bronx who struggles to reconcile his gender identity with expectations that he be the “man of the house” following the death of his father. 
Skip down to Coney Island, and musclebound Frankie (Harris Dickinson) is also attempting to square his sexuality with societal definitions of masculinity in Eliza Hittman’s emotionally harrowing Beach Rats.
There’s Stephen Cone’s Princess Cyd, starring newcomer Jessie Pinnick as a teenage girl who undergoes many a personal transformation when a summer spent with her novelist aunt (Rebecca Spence) gives her a chance to reinvent herself. 
Filmmakers from overseas gave us A Fantastic Woman (Sebastián Lelio), about a trans woman (an excellent Daniela Vega) wrestling with grief and prejudice after her lover passes away; Robin Campillo’s BPM, about activists working to combat the AIDS epidemic in ‘90s Paris; Thelma, Joachim Trier’s supernaturally-tinged coming-of-age drama about a woman (Eili Harboe) who falls for a female classmate (Kaya Wilkins) and subsequently begins to manifest fantastic powers; French outing Raw, in which a college student (Garance Marillier) experiences an awakening both culinary (cannibalism, y’all) and sexual, in the form of an obsession with her gay best friend (Rabah Nait Oufella); and The Dancer (Stéphanie Di Giusto), a biopic of turn-of-the-century modern dance pioneer — and bisexual woman — Loïe Fuller (Soko). 
Coded queerness is nothing new
Hollywood’s awkward shoehorning in of a character who’s coded as queer, even if they’re not explicitly identified as such, isn’t a particularly revolutionary thing, argues Princess Cyddirector Cone. 
Awkward shoehorning in of a character who’s coded as queer isn’t a particularly revolutionary thing.
“George Cukor was doing that in Holiday in [1938]. It’s not really anything to be proud of," he said. "Sliding a token gay [character] in your new Star Trek movie or your Beauty and the Beast is kind of weak compared to what people were doing even in the pre-Code days, in the ‘30s. They’re ahead of us in many ways! What a sad, embarrassing thing.”
Still, Cone clarifies that he’s “not a cynical person.” If LGBTQ representation in mainstream studio filmmaking isn’t perfect, at least it’s there and it’s accessible. 
“Struggling queer people who have televisions in their room have access to gay movies in the middle of the night,” he says. “They don’t have to sneak it at Blockbuster. They don’t have to wait until they’re with their friends so they can be allowed to rent it.”  
Mainstream cinema is moving past the "exclusively gay moment"
And in between films that barely feint towards the existence of queerness and those that actively center on queer stories, there’s an ever-increasing middle ground.
These aren’t the Call Me By Your Names or the Professor Marstons. Instead, they’re the Lady Birds, Atomic Blondes or The Shape of Waters: films that, while they’re not quote-unquote LGBTQ films, have subplots or characters that fall under that umbrella. 
At the same time, they exist in something of a liminal area between your massively expensive blockbusters and your under-the-radar indies, which might explain why studios have proven less gun-shy regarding LGBTQ content. These are movies that draw audiences in with the promise of Emma Stone fighting the patriarchy through tennis or Charlize Theron beating her way through Cold War Berlin. The queer storylines are a bonus. 
Watching the trailers for The Shape of Water, you might not know that Guillermo del Toro’s romantic creature feature gives us one of the year’s most emotionally affecting queer characters in Richard Jenkins’ Giles, a struggling artist coping with loneliness and self-acceptance. 
In Atomic Blonde, Charlize Theron is a kick-ass spy who just so happens to have sex with a woman (Sofia Boutella). 
Rough Night and The Battle of the Sexes are a bawdy comedy and a sports drama, respectively; both of them feature major characters who are decidedly not on the straight end of the Kinsey Scale. 
Admittedly, both of those movies handle their queer characters in different ways: In Rough Night, Blair (Zoë Kravitz) seduces the swingers next door in order to cover up the fact that she and her friends accidentally killed a stripper. 
Battle of the Sexes takes a more, shall we say, measured approach, following with sensitivity and a sweet sensuality the burgeoning relationship between tennis star Billie Jean King (Emma Stone) and hairdresser Marilyn (Andrea Riseborough). 
In these wildly different films, we see a hopeful vision of the future: one in which LGBTQ stories are told across the bounds of genre and the phrase “exclusively gay moment” gets left in the dust.
