NETFLIX AND BILL Netflix reveals expensive new ‘Ultra’ tier – and CUTS features on other plan
NETFLIX is trialling a new higher-priced plan in Europe that comes with a huge downside: it negatively impacts the other subscription options, effectively acting as a sneaky price hike.
The new "Ultra" tier – which offers high-resolution 4K streams with HDR on up to four screens at once – has been spotted in Italy for €16.99 (£14.98) and Germany for €19.99 (£17.63).	Currently, Netflix offers three packages: £5.99 for Basic, £7.99 for Standard and £9.99 for Premium, which is the current set-up in the UK. Judging by the Europe pricing, Ultra would likely cost Brits £12.99.
Basic rules out HD and Ultra HD streams and limits your viewing to one screen. Standard throws in HD and two screens. And the top tier Premium bumps you up to Ultra HD (or 4K) and offers four simultaneous screens.
The new kid on the block Ultra specifically notes its inclusion of HDR but that is already available to Premium subscribers.
For the uninitiated, HDR (or high dynamic range) is bundled in with most mid- to high-end tellys these days and essentially cranks up the pixel quality on your 4K TV, resulting in better, more accurate colours and contrast.
Netflix doesn't have a dedicated HDR section (though it will surely introduce one soon), but you can identify HDR-ready titles by peeping the HDR or Dolby Vision logo next to them.
A number of Netflix shows boast HDR including A Series of Unfortunate Events, Chef’s Table, and Marvel’s Jessica Jones, among others.
That's all well and good but, as Cordcutting.com explains, Ultra's introduction has resulted in the alteration of the other price plans.
Some Netflix users are seeing the Premium option slashed to two screens instead of four on mobile browsers to make room for the new tier, while the Standard option is left with just one screen rather than two.
To add to the confusion, the subscription plans remain unchanged on Netflix for desktop.
Ultimately, that equates to an indirect price hike as it could force Standard and Premium users to switch to higher price plans, especially families who watch across multiple devices simultaneously and require access to four screens.
We've reached out to Netflix to find out whether the new Ultra plan is heading to the UK and will update this article with its response.
The streaming service told CNET: "We continuously test new things at Netflix and these tests typically vary in length of time", adding "in this case, we are testing slightly different price points and features to better understand how consumers value Netflix."
It seems like Netflix is experimenting with the feature, so not everyone will see the Ultra tier.