WHY IS SHE LYING? Love Island’s Grace told Dr Alex she’s ‘not close’ to her family – but runs a business with her brother and is supported on the show by her devoted mum

The salon owner claimed she barely saw her family despite the fact she appears all over their social media

LOVE Island’s Grace Wardle has claimed she is not close to her family – despite running a business with her brother.

The hairdresser opened up about her family during a very awkward conversation with Dr. Alex on last night's show and said she barely did anything with them.

The news might come as a bit of a surprise to her mum Trish Kiralyfi who has been publicly supporting her throughout the competition.

The proud mum’s Instagram bio mentions her three children and her account is also full of images of herself and Grace – suggesting they are in fact rather close.

There are also numerous pictures of Grace with her brother Jackson, who she opened a business with just nine months ago.

The pair founded Jackson and Grace Limited, which is registered to an office in Wembley and they are both directors of.

Jackson is also a hairdresser and is a stylist at another branch of Headmasters. He declined to comment when contacted by The Sun Online.

During the cringe worthy chat last night, Alex told her: “I would love to do more trips and travelling and see my family more.”

She responded: “Oh my family, we don’t really do anything together.”

Alex continued: “I am such a family person.  I speak to my mum and dad every day.”

But Grace wasn’t impressed, adding: “We’re not close at all.”

The salon owner later admitted things were going pretty badly with Alex, saying in The Beach Hut: "It’s getting quite difficult with Alex.

"When we were first talking, there’s so much to talk about because we were getting to know each other and now I’m finding it a little bit difficult to get some fun, more light hearted conversation with him."

Alex seemed to be on the same wave-length, saying: "I don’t think it’s going forward with Grace, I think it’s going sideways… She doesn’t quite get my sense of humour."

https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/6702730/love-island-2018-grace-dr-alex-family/