Happy Independence Day!
Image
Fresh strawberry pie.CreditLinda Xiao for The New York Times
By Sam Sifton
July 4, 2018

Good morning. Our Rachel Wharton traveled to the southernmost part of New Jersey to report on some of the small farmers who are growing heirloom blueberry varietals there, just across the road from the mammoth producers who dominate the East Coast blueberry game. It is an engaging report on a beautiful part of the world, and absolutely worth your time to read, if only because it may spur you to cook a blueberry pie today, to celebrate America.

Some, though, prefer a strawberry pie: Samantha Seneviratne’s new recipe for a fresh strawberry pie (above) will also answer the call of the United States today, the berries forming a more perfect union with the cloud of whipped cream that adorns its top.

Many will grill through the holiday, at cookouts and barbecues, mostly over glowing charcoal or burning propane. (Here is our complete recipe guide for the day.) Some, though, will cook with burning wood. As Steven Raichlen told us this week in a smart story about a growing trend among the outdoor-cooking authorities, “the world’s oldest cooking method has become one of its newest culinary quests.”

What to cook over your fiery log (or briquettes or flavor bars)? Raichlen answers with some recipes of his own: grilled swordfish kebabs with golden raisin chimichurri; grilled summer beans with garlic and herbs; grilled pork chops with peanuts, sesame and cilantro.

ADVERTISEMENT


Perhaps you’re not going out for the holiday. Maybe it’s your lot to sit at home keeping as cool as you can, devising a plan for how you’re going to handle the pets when the fireworks come tonight and their adrenaline spikes and they start to whimper and shake. Have a cocktail, please. Robert Simonson’s guide to making classic drinks is at your service.

Or, you’re just not that into it, this whole pageant dedicated to our exceptionalism. Make this cold cabbage salad Angela Dimayuga came up with at Mission Chinese Food, which is an absolute riot to eat. Just because. Or, I dunno, some green tomatoes with Russian dressing? Make something, anyway. Cooking is always the right thing to do.

You have 4 free articles remaining.

Subscribe to The Times
There are thousands and thousands more recipes to choose from on NYT Cooking. Yes, it is true: You will need a subscription to access them. We are a subscription business, after all, and dependent on a relationship with you that trades our work for your money in exchange for your happiness and our continued employment. It’s a feedback loop, a virtuous circle! Please sign up today.

But should something go wrong with a recipe or our technology or indeed with your subscription, don’t go yelling on a street corner. Just reach out to us for guidance, help, advice or instruction: cookingcare@nytimes.com. We’ll make it right. We love to do that.

Now, it’s just barely to do with galettes or foie gras, but who can deny a reporter the chance to write about dogs? Here’s Tejal Rao on a training program in Maryland that teaches hounds to sniff out signs of bee-colony collapse before it happens.

EDITORS’ PICKS

Silicon Valley’s Giants Take Their Talent Hunt to Cambridge

You Can’t Hurt Lindsay Lohan Now

How Trump’s Trade War Went From 18 Products to 10,000
ADVERTISEMENT


Check out Chris Maggio’s photographs in the series “Bored on the 4th of July,” in The New Yorker.

And do you need a novel to read on the beach, or in the shade of a tree (or curled up on the sofa next to a whirring air conditioner)? I’m late to it, but: Fredrik Backman’s page-turner “Beartown,” about a Swedish youth-league hockey team in a dying forest town. It’s good! Try that and I’ll be back on Friday. Enjoy the holiday.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/04/dining/happy-independence-day.html