Diamonds are a man’s best friend 

9 February 2016 1:00pm

By Paige Ashley


While there’s moonlight and love and romance, diamonds will always be special – as the men who founded the great jewellery houses knew

From Marilyn Monroe’s fuchsia-and-diamond-clad performance in the 1953 film Gentlemen Prefer Blondes to Audrey Hepburn staring doe-eyed at gems in Breakfast at Tiffany’s in 1961, pop culture has buyers believing that dangling a diamond in front of a woman makes her yours forever.

Behind the beginnings of some of the world’s most coveted jewellery powerhouses were men: Harry Winston, Charles Lewis Tiffany, Alfred Van Cleef and Salomon Arpels.

A lot is known about their jewellery and the women who wore it, but the determination, innovatiion and originality of these entrepreneurs is not always honoured as it should be.

The jewellery house responsible for the little blue box packaging that has become as iconic as its engagement rings, Tiffany & Co, has a story that began in 1837.

Charles Lewis Tiffany and John B Young opened the doors to their stationery and fancy goods emporium in Lower Manhattan. In 1853, with Charles at the helm, the company turned its talents to jewellery.

But they didn’t stop at trinkets. Tiffany & Co has a rich history, which includes designing swords for the Union Army in 1862; the 1902 redesign of the Medal of Honor for the US Navy; and in 1956 Tiffany collaborated with Andy Warhol to create a collection of Christmas cards.

In 1884, Greek jeweller Sotirios Boulgaris opened a shop on Via Sistina in Rome. This was the second shop Boulgaris, the founder of Bulgari, ever opened. His first venture into jewellery was a store in his home town of Paramythia, Greece, which can still be seen today.
“At the age of 12, eagle-eyed jeweller’s son Harry Winston spotted a two-carat emerald in a pawn shop. He snapped it up for 25 cents and sold it for $800”

Along with his sons, Costantino and Giorgio, Sotiros built up a family empire in jewellery and luxury goods which is as strong today as it has ever been. Bulgari’s designs do not shy away from being bold, the strong, architectural lines include interlocking steel and link motifs.

In contrast to Bulgari are the delicate flower and fairy designs of Van Cleef & Arpels which have been adored for more than a century by royalty and Hollywood royalty alike.

The story began in 1896, when Alfred Van Cleef and his uncle Salomon Arpels founded the jewellery giant. Princess Grace and Elizabeth Taylor were fans, while one of the company’s most important commissions was to design the coronation crown for Empress Farah Pahlavi of Iran in 1967.

Harry Winston, earned the title "Jeweller to the Stars", as he was the first to loan diamonds to an actress for the Academy Awards. In 1943, Best Actress nominee Jennifer Jones graced the red carpet in Winston’s diamonds.

Since then, a trend for award season has been to adorn female actors with the best and the brightest diamonds the jewellery world has to offer.

Legend has it that in 1908 at the age of 12, eagle-eyed jeweller’s son Harry Winston spotted a two-carat emerald in a pawn shop. He snapped it up for 25 cents and in just two days turned a handsome profit by selling it for $800.

For something special for a loved one, check out Fellows’ Antique & Modern Jewellery auction on 11 February 2016 which includes diamonds by Cartier, as well as pieces by Van Cleef & Arpels, Tiffany & Co and more.

Search Fellows at barnebys.co.uk/auctions/jewellery-and-gems

Search more than 28,000 pieces of jewellery at barnebys.co.uk
