A City Founded by Alexander Hamilton Sets the Stage for Its Next Act
PATERSON, N.J. — On a lively stretch of Main Street, one bakery is Syrian and another is Colombian 
and Italian. A Yemeni restaurant opened near a Lebanese spot. And across the street, there is a 
barbershop called Palestine, where men getting haircuts filled nearly every seat.
André Sayegh, the newly elected mayor, grew up in this neighborhood in Paterson’s south end. He has 
seen its evolution. Arrivals from around the world have flocked here, many coming from the Middle 
East, and have opened the businesses — the restaurants, meat markets, shops and salons — that draw 
customers from well beyond the city’s borders. Mr. Sayegh sees the neighborhood not just as a 
bright spot in a distressed city, but as a template for growth for other parts of Paterson where 
progress has been much more difficult to achieve. “We have all the right ingredients,” Mr. Sayegh, who spent a decade on the City Council, said as 
he walked along Main Street.
In recent years, the two largest cities in New Jersey, Newark and Jersey City, have mostly been on 
the rise. But Paterson, the third largest, has continued to be defined in large part by its 
struggles: crime, poverty and a pervasive sense of limited opportunity.
Still, there is a growing contingent who believe Paterson is primed for revival, imagining a 
renaissance propelled by what they see as the city’s most promising assets: its diversity 
(dozens of ethnic groups live here) and a rich history (Alexander Hamilton helped found it). 
And there are the Great Falls, an unlikely scene of natural splendor in the middle of an urban 
center, a national park where water from the Passaic River cascades over a 77-foot cliff.
“We keep saying it’s Paterson’s time,” said Inge Spungen, the executive director of the Paterson 
Alliance, a collective of nonprofits. “A lot of the other cities around us have come back. Newark 
and Jersey City have had improvements in their cities. I think a lot of people believe it’s 
Paterson’s turn.”
Yet for all the optimistic talk, there are visible reminders of the city’s chronic problems. 
Mr. Sayegh follows a mayor, Joey Torres, who was sentenced to five years in prison for corruption, 
and the Police Department is the target of a federal investigation, which has already led to the 
arrests of several officers on suspected civil rights violations and narcotics charges.
Ruby Cotton, the City Council president, said she regularly hears from residents complaining about 
a lack of jobs, the need for economic development and shortcomings in the quality of life. 
“They’re looking for peace and quiet,” Ms. Cotton said.