Where a Taboo Is Leading to the Deaths of Young Girls
TURMAKHAND, Nepal — Not long ago, in rural western Nepal, Gauri Kumari Bayak was the spark of her 
village. Her strong voice echoed across the fields as she husked corn. When she walked down the 
road at a brisk clip, off to lead classes on birth control, many admired her self-confidence.
But last January, Ms. Bayak’s lifeless body was carried up the hill, a stream of mourners bawling 
behind her. Her remains were burned, her dresses given away. The little hut where she was pressured 
to sequester herself during her menstrual period — and where she died — was smashed apart, erasing 
the last mark of another young life lost to a deadly superstition.
“I still can’t believe she’s not alive,” said Dambar Budha, her father-in-law, full of regret, 
sitting on a rock, staring off into the hills.
In this corner of Nepal, deep in the Himalayas, women are banished from their homes every month 
when they get their period. They are considered polluted, even toxic, and an oppressive regime has 
evolved around this taboo, including the construction of a separate hut for menstruating women to 
sleep in. Some of the spaces are as tiny as a closet, walls made of mud or rock, basically 
menstruation foxholes. Ms. Bayak died from smoke inhalation in hers as she tried to keep warm by a 
small fire in the bitter Himalayan winter.
Each year, at least one woman or girl — often more — dies in these huts, from exposure to the cold, 
smoke inhalation or attacks by animals. Just this June, another young woman was found dead in a 
menstruation hut, bitten by a snake. Her family tried to cover up the death, the police said, by 
destroying the hut and quickly burying her body, but the authorities exhumed it and are 
investigating what happened.
The practice is called chhaupadi (pronounced CHOW-pa-dee), from Nepali words that mean someone who 
bears an impurity, and it has been going on for hundreds of years. But now, the Nepali government 
and advocates for women are trying to end it. Starting in August, for the first time, it will be a 
crime to force a menstruating woman into seclusion, punishable by up to three months in jail, though 
it’s not clear if that’s going to make a dent in the tradition.