Manga Entertainment announces October Releases
2000-10-03 23:20 UTC-8
On October 31st Manga Entertainment will be shipping Angel Cop: The Collection on DVD as well as the third and final volume of Rayearth on VHS.

In Angel Cop, Japan is under attack. A group of violent terrorists, known as the Red May, have launched a wave of bombings and murders across Tokyo, 
threatening the stability of the entire country. In response, the government calls in the Special Security Force (SSF), 
an elite law enforcement division that uses any method necessary to protect public safety.

As the Red May continue their assault, the SSF unleash their deadliest
weapon: Angel, a woman whose skill in combat is matched by her beauty. But Angel soon learns that the situation is far more complex and dangerous than she thought. 
The terrorists are dying before she can get to them. Ripped apart by some ferocious and inexplicable force, 
whomever else is after the Red May has the power to destroy anything or anyone in their way - including Angel and her team!

As the mystery deepens and the body count rises, a lethal government
conspiracy is brought to light. What is the mysterious "H-file"? And will Angel live long enough to find out?

Available for the first time on DVD as a single package, Angel Cop: The Collection brings you six episodes of explosive sci-fi action, 
set in a world where the only thing more brutal than crime is law. The DVD features include: a 4 X 3 transfer, a digital re-master, In Stereo, 
In English, Japanese and Japanese with English Subtitles, Manga Previews, Links, Fan Club Info and a DVD catalog.

Street Date: October 31, 2000
Pre-Book Date: September 11, 2000
Running Time 180 minutes
Retail Price: $29.95
Order number: 6-60200-40632-5
Distributed by Ryko Distribution

Learning that faith in one's friendship is the ultimate power, three young friends discover they need to change the course of destiny to save the world. 
In the previous episodes, the girls tapped into their own spirit beast deities to become the Magic Knights and fought against Cephiro City's evildoers.

In Volume Three, the final battle for the survival of Earth has begun.

Princess Emeraude's brother, Eagle, the keeper of the eternal dream in which the Princess remains frozen, has traveled through the gateway between Cephiro and Tokyo. 
Aided by the spirits of the dead, he launches a massive assault against the Magic Knights, wielding dark energies drawn from the castle of Cephiro itself. 
Eaglehas sworn to destroy the girls and everything they love, to kill until nothing in the universe remains. His only goal is complete destruction - can even Rayearth, 
the awesome combination of all three Magic Knights and their spirit beasts prevent the destruction of the world?

The all-new Rayearth OAV (original video animation) series follows the very popular Magic Knight Rayearth Japanese television series. 
Directed by Toshihiro Hirano, creator of Zeoraima and Vampire Princess Miyu.

Running Time: 45 minutes
Street Date: October 31, 2000
Pre-Book Date: September 11, 2000
Dub: $19.95 Order number: 6-60200-4068-3-7
Sub: $29.95 Order number: 6-60200-4067-3-8
