US Open: Brooks Koepka snatches back-to-back titles after Tommy Fleetwood's record round 

Sir Nick Faldo believed Tommy Fleetwood had done enough to win his first major here after his record-equalling 63 and so, too, did the bookmakers who made the young Englishman the long odds-on favourite going into the enthralling final hour of the 118th US Open.

But they had not reckoned on the talent and remarkable resilience of Brooks Koepka, the 28-year-old American who became just the third player since the war – following Ben Hogan and Curtis Strange – to defend his title.

Just when it appeared Fleetwood was on the brink of emulating Justin Rose’s success five years ago, so Koepka proceeded to produce a succession of stunning saves before the crucial birdie on the 16th which afforded him the comfort to bogey the 18th to win by a shot on one-over after a 68.

Fleetwood must console himself with a cheque for $1.2m, a place in the world's top 10 and of a share of history. Only five players before had ever shot a 63 before in the major known as “golf’s ultimate test”. Yet it could so easily have been a 62 – not to mention a play-off.

The 27-year-old from Southport could have set up an exclusive US Open club of his very own. He was presented with a nine-footer for a birdie on the 18th that would have been just the second 62 in the majors after Branden Grace’s breakthrough at Royal Birkdale 12 months ago.

Alas, Fleetwood’s effort dribbled agonisingly wide. ”I knew what it was for and I started it on the line I wanted to, but it was a little bit slower than I thought," Fleetwood said.

His seven-under magnificence – the lowest round of the week by two shots - left Fleetwood on two-over and in for a long wait, with the leaders just starting the back nine. At one stage his success seemed so likely, that Faldo tweeted, “I’ll be surprised if Tommy does not win”.

It was reminiscient of the 1993 US Open when Jack Nicklaus shook the hand of Colin Montgomerie and told him he had won, despite the pacesetters not having reached the meat of their rounds. Nicklaus had over-estimated the brutality of the Pebble Beach run-in on that occasion and Faldo did the same here.  But due to the rank failings of the organisers that was eminently forgivable on Faldo’s behalf.

The USGA plainly panicked after the Saturday shambles  – in which Fleetwood shot a 78– and applied so many thousands gallons of water to take the sting out of the layout.  In truth, it seemed a different course. Fleetwood was not moaning, taking inspiration from his fourth place in the US Open in 2017 to launch his unlikely challenge.

There were four birdies on the front nine, as well as a costly bogey on the ninth, but it was from the 12th where he lit the fireworks. He reeled off a spectacular quartet. There was an 18-footer on the 12th, an approach to two-feet on the 13th, a chip-in on the 14th and a 30-footer on the 15th.

"I never thought I was out of it, I just needed a good start,” he said.  "We knew they would have made it a bit softer and the pins were more accessible. Four under through seven and it was game on. It was great to get it going on the back nine.

"I always felt I could get myself back in it but when you finish you are always going to be just short."

It means the Americans have won the last five majors and when they have a player of the caliber of this 28-year-old – who along with Rory McIlroy and Jordan Spieth becomes the only players currently under 30 years of age  to have won multiple majors – their burgeoning confidence is entirely understandable.

Koepka was out for three months earlier this year with a wrist injury. But the Floridian overcame that hurdle and, indeed, all the absurdity the USGA threw at this field with their ridiculous course set-ups. “I’ve been through a lot this season and that makes this so welcome,” he said. “I really didn’t want to give this trophy back.”

In third came Dustin Johnson on three-over with Patrick Reed a further shot back in fourth.  Johnson’s disappointment in not being able to convert a four-shot halfway lead is tempered by the fact he holds on to world no 1.

Justin Rose began the day one off the pace with his second US Open title and the top of the rankings in his sights. But his challenge failed to mobilise, as he recorded a 73 for seven-over and a tie for 10.

One ahead in a tie for seventh after a 69 was yet another Englishman in Tyrrell Hatton, the 26-year-old who was recording his third top 10 in a major. Indeed, this was a fine major for Britain with Scotland’s Russell Knox and Sheffield’s Matt Fitzpatrick also in the top 12, both finishing on eight-over after a 69 and 70 respectively.

Earlier, all the attention had fallen on Phil Mickelson and if his ball had moved as quickly as the golfer, himself, managed to as he sped past reporters here after his final-round 69 then there would have been no chance of the controversy which has tarnished the reputation of America’s darling. No comment, no remorse.

Mickelson celebrated his par on the 13th - the scene of his Saturday outrage where he deliberately hit his ball as it gathered pace down a slope – as if he won the championship. It was an unedifying spectacle as was his behaviour afterwards. He gave one brief comment. “The real question is, what will I do next?” he said. “I don’t know.” The first thing should be properly to apologise.
