Antony and Cleopatra: first look at the NT production starring Ralph Fiennes and Sophie Okonedo 

By Ben Lawrence 

18 June 2018 8:00am 

In September, Simon Godwin’s new production of Shakespeare’s Antony and Cleopatra will open on the National Theatre’s Olivier stage. Ralph Fiennes and Sophie Okonedo star as the lovers whose passionate private lives have a devastating effect on the political spheres they inhabit.

Antony and Cleopatra is, of course, a love story but it is also a political thriller. Godwin sees it as “not quite Romeo and Juliet and not quite Julius Caesar but a bit of both”.

“It is about regime change and it has urgent connotations. You could talk about Libya or you could talk about Syria. When and why do you intervene and what happens when the person you send to intervene takes up the opposing cause?”
Godwin is talking about Mark Antony, one of Rome’s triumvirate who decamps to Egypt where he falls for the Queen of the Nile.

“It’s an act of supreme and fascinating betrayal when Antony becomes head of the Egyptian navy,” says Godwin. “It’s like one of Trump’s company falling in love with the leader of another super power. Can you imagine? It would be a huge event in world history.”

The play is about the conflict between public and private, between the political and the personal, and in Fiennes and Okonedo, there is no doubt that Godwin has found two actors who can suggest greatness and moments of small psychological intimacy.

“Cleopatra is an iconic part, but it is vertiginous and it requires guts,” he says. “And Sophie has guts. She isn’t vain and she is willing to go to strange and dark places.

“She is radiant and sexy and she can be emotionally true. We have seen too many Cleopatras where the role-playing [IE playing a woman who is playing at being the Queen of Egypt] has become the dominant mode.”

Antony, too, can be misjudged. Too often he is seen as a staggering lush well past his prime.

“Failure hangs over the play,” says Godwin, “and the trap is to play Antony like he’s a failure. Ralph will make him a man of action, of intensity and heroism, rather than a depleted figure.”

Antony’s uncharacteristic behaviour - his autumnal passions and latent trust of emotion - are anathema to the play’s third key character, Octavius Caesar - the youngest and most ambitious of the triumvirate who, unquestionably, represents the future of the Empire.

“I don’t want to make him an administrative bore,” says Godwin. “The performance would shrink if you did that. Caesar needs to be attractive, savvy and ruthless and we have cast Tunji Kasim [who played the head of studio in the National’s recent production of Network] who is handsome and strong and also has a real modernity to him.”

Antony and Cleopatra poses something of a headache for a director. There is its length for a start which Godwin has slightly truncated so that he expects it to run at around three hours and 15 minutes (at full length it would run to about four). It also contains 42 scenes and, as Godwin says: “Most of them seem to be in Act IV during the war and it’s hard to follow. I want a production that is fleet of foot.”

For research, Godwin travelled to Egypt and considered how the country of Shakespeare’s imagination was very different from our own. “We are doing it in modern dress but we are still capturing the culture through the lens of Shakespeare’s imagination.

“I can’t depend on realistic portrayals because Shakespeare was so fantastical. It would be interesting to do do an Islamic version of Egypt but that wouldn’t be true to Shakespeare’s version.”

Egypt, says Godwin, is “permissive, sensuous and sexual” and Rome is “controlling, rational and formal.”

The production will, no doubt, be boosted by the designs of the award-winning Hildegard Bechtler who has created terrifically stark aesthetics for wunderkind Robert Icke (Hamlet, Oresteia).


“Her design is good at not drowning the play in a mobile phone aesthetic,” says Godwin. “Her work is fuelled by beauty and grace and can make Egypt seductive and can make Rome steely but also stylish.

“We also wanted to avoid the cliches - the cat statues, the Egyptian paraphernalia. We’ve seen enough of that and we can better represent the near east than through the recourse of a slightly outmoded symbolism of that world.”

Ultimately, Antony and Cleopatra is a tragedy and the act of dying, and the strange beauty of it as enacted by both lovers in the play is, Godwin believes, crucial to its appeal.

“Shakespeare was a shrewd-enough businessman to know that universals were his stock-in trade. We are all going to die, that’s a given. There is a metaphorical dimension in the final act when he is asking what it means to die well, what it means to physically die and to die with a legacy that will endure for thousands of years.

“That moment of watching the play and also watching a history - we are watching Cleopatra die in the way she would have died all those years ago - that’s very meta in a rich and exciting way for a modern audience. Her death [taken by her own hand rather than surrendering to the will of Rome] is also a metaphor for how we might all wish to die since we all must!”

Antony and Cleopatra previews from September 18 and is in repertoire until January 19. It will be broadcast live as part of NT Live to cinemas worldwide on December 6; nationaltheatre.org

