Jurassic 'World Evolution' is the dino video game of our childhood dreams
Tycoon games became a staple in many childhoods after Rollercoaster Tycoon showed us the joy of murdering a bunch of innocent theme park visitors through horribly designed coaster rides.
Now imagine that, but instead of death traps disguised as a rollercoaster, you've got a rampaging T-Rex to terrorize people with. And that's basically how we spent our roughly hour and a half of playtime with Frontier Developments' demo for the upcoming Jurassic World Evolution sim game. 
While not exactly the "official" premise of business simulators like Frontier's classic Rollercoaster Tycoon or the new Jurassic World game, the designers admittedly know that not every player will come into their game with the purest of intentions. Sure, building your own fully functioning, hazard-free, profitable, and ethical dinosaur theme park sounds nice and all. 
But is it really in the spirit of Jurassic Park? Nope.
"It’s inevitable if you open a park, something will go wrong," said game director Michael Brooke. Much of the Jurassic World Evolution game is designed to play out like a  typical zoo tycoon game — with daily operations moving somewhat smoothly. 
But, "you can get into various calamities: staff sabotage, dinosaur escapes, territorial fights, weather storms."
Even if the goal of this business sim might differ from the movies, Murphy's Law still applies here.
And that's not to mention the other chaos the game permits in order to satisfy evil players like me  who only want to sow as much chaos and destruction as possible. For example, you can "accidentally" (on purpose) leave gates to the dinosaur enclosures open. And if you think only clever girl Tyrannosaurus Rexes are a danger to your visitors, you'd be dead wrong (literally). 
Sure, the carnivores will straight up eat people. But the herbivores can cause equal amounts of chaos by charging crowds. And everyone who remembers Wayne Knight's death scene in Jurassic Park knows only a fool would assume smaller dinosaurs can't deal a lot of damage.
But even without players intentionally making things go wrong, the dinosaurs have a dangerous mind and life of their own. 
One of the team's biggest goals and achievements lies in the incredible fidelity of the dinosaurs, from their appearance to their intricate AI. Their behavior patterns are affected by the environment around them, and specific species needs. Some require socialization to be happy, while others need a wide breadth of space to be part of a safe ecosystem. Meeting these needs and challenges influence their overall mood, causing everything from angry to fearful responses.
While you play most of the game from a god-like, third-eye perspective, you have the option to go to a more first-person experience and take control of the staff who go in to maintain enclosure. While no maintenance people were killed in the making of my playthrough, history has proven Jurassic Parks aren't kind to them in the long run.
Small escalations of danger are actually embedded into the narrative progression of the game itself, too. You start off on a calm and easy island with fair weather in order to get the tutorial lessons. But like every profitable business, you're eventually pressured into expanding beyond it. 
The risk of expansion here isn't just a potentially disastrous business venture, either.
"In the films, they never really took the threat seriously enough, did they?" asked Brooke. "In Jurassic Park, Hammond says they spared no expense. But that didn't seem to account for a total system failure of their machines.”
Similarly in Jurassic World Evolution, you must balance three separate divisions as a member of the Hammond Foundation: security, entertainment, and science. Each come with their own cost and value, both monetarily and morally speaking. We didn't get to mess around with it too much, but the DNA splicing seen in the first Jurassic World movie did seem like a possibility. 
"If you look at the films, they've tended to focus on only one of those divisions: entertainment,” Brooke said. Corporate greed is probably why those parks keep running into the same issues. "But, to be fair, you need to use all three divisions in order to be the ultimate in dinosaur management."
When you move onto harder locations with tropical storms and difficult terrains, it invites a whole host of other complications. Brooke even hinted at the potential to eventually start looking into militarization operations — which, again, didn't end well for the folks of Jurassic World. 
But luckily, Jeff Goldblum is reprising his role as Dr. Ian Malcolm, acting as the voice of conscious and reason that gives player's advice (remotely, mind you) about the wrongdoing that lead to the catastrophes he witnessed. But there are other characters whispering in your ear, too, imploring you to keep pushing your parks to the absolute limit of ethical practices.
Jurassic World Evolution seems to have something for everyone: If you want to watch a T-Rex eat the shit out of a poor goat, or instigate a T-Rex v Triceratops territorial battle to the death — you're in luck. Or, for those who aren't particularly fans of the IP, it's still an intricate and engaging business sim with lots of interconnected systems that requires thought-out management strategies. 
But perhaps the biggest draw of all is the same one experienced in the Jurassic Park films: dinosaurs are fucking rad. And imagining how our world would interact with theirs is fantastic.
"They're magnificent beasts," said Brooke. "They ruled the earth for so long. Humanity has existed for only about 100,000 years. But they stalked the earth for 65 million years. There’s this undeniable lure to their sheer scale, as the masters of the planet before we came along."
Jurassic World Evolution releases digitally on June 12 for PC, PS4 and Xbox One, while physical copies for PS4 and Xbox One will become available on July 3.