Solving Crimes the Old-Fashioned Way
By Marilyn Stasio
April 13, 2018

Jeffery Deaver is at his graciously cruel best in THE CUTTING EDGE (Grand Central, $28). First he takes us to the Diamond District in Midtown Manhattan, where “hundreds of millions” in foreign and domestic currency changes hands daily. Next he introduces us to some very sympathetic characters. Jatin Patel, an Indian immigrant, is a “diamantaire,” a master diamond cutter famed for his flawless work. William Sloane and his fiancée, Anna, are on a “joyous errand” to Patel Designs, to pick up Anna’s 1.5-carat princess-cut engagement ring.

“Diamond heists have a gentlemanly quality,” we are assured by an insurance company representative. “Violence of any sort is very rare. It’s not playing fair.” Tell that to Patel and his clients. Once Deaver seduces us with warm feelings of good will, he produces a man with a foreign accent who ties up the lovebirds and tortures Patel with a box cutter before killing them all off.

Deaver’s singular flair for ghastly irony is on full display in these opening scenes. Because the murderer, who calls himself “the Promisor,” is indulging in a very grand and very nasty scheme: to murder couples at their happiest moments, like buying an engagement ring, picking out a bridal gown or planning a wedding. But he’s none too pleased when he has to interrupt his killing schedule to hunt down the only witness to the latest of his atrocious crimes: Patel’s gifted young apprentice, Vimal Lahori, a sweet innocent who is now running for his life.

For reasons that don’t need to make sense, the case is given to Deaver’s brilliant but eccentric criminologist, Lincoln Rhyme, and his team. Although almost completely paralyzed, Rhyme works with utmost efficiency from the living room of his townhouse, which comes fully equipped with high-tech gadgets, including a very serious gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer. Rhyme may be the working brain on this crew, but hang on when his partner, Amelia Sachs, does her spooky-psych thing and projects herself into the mind of this sick killer.

Unless she has a change of heart, Anne Perry has written her last mystery featuring her Victorian-era sleuths, Thomas and Charlotte Pitt. But, as we learn in TWENTY-ONE DAYS (Ballantine, $28), the Pitts’ son, Daniel, is eager to carry on the family tradition. A junior (at 25, very junior) barrister in London, he’s determined to make his mark without the helping hand of his eminent father, who rose from a humble position as a police inspector to become the head of Special Branch.

Although he lacks his father’s character-defining rough edges, Daniel is no snob. Besides, the blameless but disagreeable client he must try to save from the gallows is an egotistic author who has more than his share of snobbery. While Daniel could use some toughening up, that’s likely to happen very soon. After all, if he’s making his debut in 1910, it won’t be long before he’ll be living in far too interesting times. Poor guy.

We’ve all heard (or echoed) that tired canard: “They just don’t make them like that anymore.” Well, Loren D. Estleman still does. The traditional values live on in BLACK AND WHITE BALL (Forge/Tom Doherty, $25.99), which features Amos Walker, an old-school, hard-boiled private eye from Detroit who smokes, drinks and fixes supper like a man (“deviled ham, eaten straight from the can with a spoon”).

This time out, Walker agrees to do bodyguard work for Peter Macklin, a professional hit man whose estranged wife is getting death threats and needs protection. It’s a sensitive case because Macklin suspects his own son may be responsible.

Estleman writes snappy dialogue and uses multiple points of view to tell his story. Even his thugs observe personal codes of honor; like their classic role models, these tough guys don’t dance. But the best scenes are the ones narrated by Walker, a man of the people whose retro wisecracks can be crass and cynical or unexpectedly reflective. When a reference he’s made to Saigon draws a blank from a young man, all he says is: “Theme park. Before your time.”

It’s not easy being Bernie Gunther. And, alas, this may be our last encounter with him since his creator, Philip Kerr, has just died, at only 62, of cancer.

Consider the complicated history of this foxy German sleuth: A detective with the Berlin Criminal Police who had to live by his wits to survive under the Nazis, Gunther built up layered identities that he would slip in and out of. The war is long over in GREEKS BEARING GIFTS (Marian Wood/Putnam, $27), but he’s still living under the radar and trusting no one. Especially not in Athens, a city crawling with aging SS men, some of the thousands of war criminals who have slipped through the net of the international justice system. Memo from Bernie: “Unless you’re talking to Bertolt Brecht or Albert Einstein never ask a German what he did during the war.”

Gunther is now working undercover as an insurance investigator while helping a local lawman on a homicide case. But even a garden-variety murder can quickly turn dangerous in this volatile political climate.
