Kim Jong-un won’t give up his nukes, UK ex-foreign ministers warn Donald Trump


Kim Jong-un is unlikely to give up his nuclear weapons despite his summit with Donald Trump, former UK foreign ministers who covered Asia have warned. 

Speaking to The Daily Telegraph, the ex-ministers said they were “extremely sceptical” of the chance of a breakthrough and feared the regime was playing similar games as in the past. 

Dame Margaret Beckett, the former foreign secretary, said it was “hard to believe” Kim will give away his weapons while Lord Malloch-Brown, who once held the Asia brief, predicted it would not happen. 

Their fears are a stark contrast to Mr Trump, who has talked up the chance of denuclearisation on the Korean peninsula amid warming diplomatic relations this year. 

The US president is even considering inviting Kim to his Mar-a-Lago golf resort in Florida if talks go well, according to Bloomberg - though he is willing to walk out if things go sour. 

More concerns that the June 12 summit in Singapore may not bring the breakthrough the Trump administration desires have begun to surface ahead of the meeting. 

Shinzo Abe, the Japanese prime minister, will urge Mr Trump not to forget his country’s security concerns in his drive for a deal when they meet for White House talks on Thursday. 

Meanwhile US congressmen have attempted to wrestle some control of the process by introducing a bill that demands a detailed administration report on North Korea’s nuclear program

Mr Trump and Kim’s meeting in Singapore will be historic, but experts have said the event could be big on symbolism yet short of major policy breakthroughs. 

Britain is not directly involved in the talks but is one of a handful of countries with a permanent ambassador in Pyongyang. Theresa May discussed the summit with Mr Trump this week. 

Asked if Kim was really willing to give up the nuclear weapons his family has been striving to develop over decades of rule, former Foreign Office figures expressed pessimism. 

Lord Malloch-Brown, the foreign minister overseeing Asia between 2007 and 2009, said: “No. The examples of Libya will hold back Kim and there will also be spoilers on Trump’s own team.

“If President Trump’s word was predictable and trustworthy it might come down differently at least for Kim."

Muammar Gaddafi, the Libyan leader, gave up his nuclear programme but was later overthrown and killed. Meanwhile the North Koreans have expressed concerns about John Bolton, Mr Trump’s national security adviser. 

Lord Malloch-Brown added: "Nevertheless President Trump is right to roll the dice on this as previous US policy has achieved little."

Dame Margaret, foreign secretary between 2006 and 2007, said she can “completely understand people being sceptical” and urged the US president to “approach with caution”. 

“I think it is right not to turn down the opportunity but it’s also right to be very conscious of what you’re doing and the risks,” she said. 

“As I understand it, it’s looked promising in the past and then nothing has come of it. I think that’s something people should be very aware of.”

Other ex-ministers were more optimistic. Sir Henry Bellingham, foreign office minister 2010 and 2012, told this newspaper that he was “extremely sceptical” of North Korea’s rhetoric, but added the “catastrophic” state of the economy could convince Kim to do a deal.

Grant Shapps, who held a trade brief that covered Asia when in the cabinet, also said a deal was achievable. 

The Trump administration wants complete, verifiable, and irreversible denuclearisation in North Korea and favours only lifting economic sanctions once that has been achieved.  

North Korea is believed to favour a phased denuclearisation, where economic benefits will come into effect alongside a rolling back of its nuclear programme.  

Ahead of his visit to Washington, Mr Abe told reporters: “I want to make sure to be on the same page with President Trump ahead of the first ever U.S.-North Korea summit so we can push forward nuclear and missile issues, and most importantly the abduction problem, and make for a successful summit.” 

Meanwhile Rudy Giuliani, Mr Trump's lawyer, said that Kim got "on his hands and knees and begged" for the summit to be rearranged after Mr Trump cancelled it. 

The comments could anger Pyongyang, who have previously lashed out when Trump officials were seen to have spoken out of turn. 