D.D. DAY David Davis holds crunch talks with Theresa May over her ‘too soft’ Brexit plan

In a dangerous split from the PM, the Brexit Secretary sees the No10 blueprint as a betrayal of the referendum result

DAVID Davis was last night leading a frantic bid by senior Tory eurosceptics to talk Theresa May out of her controversial new ‘soft Brexit’ plan.

In a dangerous split for the PM, the Brexit Secretary shares Leave-backing MPs’ anger that the new No10 blueprint betrays the referendum result.

The plan would see Britain keep EU regulations for most goods to keep trade flowing from Europe, but adopt our own laws on tariffs slapped on imports from abroad in nearly all cases - meaning we can strike new deals with countries around the world.

Mr Davis held a second round of one to one talks with Mrs May in 24 hours last night in a bid to harden her new negotiating stand, The Sun can reveal.

Allies say the former SAS reservist fears she is about to give too much away in her bid to kick start stalled talks with the EU.

A Brexiteer briefed on Mr Davis’s discussions with the PM said: “It’s a choice about strategy. Do you be extremely reasonable and adjust, or do you face down the EU?

“They will come to us eventually, we just need to hold our nerve.”

At the same time, Mrs May mounted her own battle against time to try to persuade senior Cabinet ministers to side with her during a make or break Cabinet showdown at Chequers tomorrow.

The PM called in Home Secretary Sajid Javid and Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson yesterday afternoon – seen as two key swing votes around her bitterly divided top table.

She argued that her plan to align with Brussels rules on goods and collect EU customs tariffs in order to keep borders with Europe free flowing will only affect 4% of all UK trade, and crucially not stop Britain from pursuing an independent trade policy after Brexit.

Mr Davis was coordinating a “ring round” of Brexiteer Cabinet Ministers to make sure they were “all on the same page”.

An ally said the ministers would “be ready at Chequers to show very simply where promises made in the PM’s speeches were crossed by the new proposals”.

The Brexit Secretary is working closely with Boris Johnson, with both confident that Mr Javid was also still opposed to collecting customs on behalf of the EU – a new system dubbed the Facilitated Customs Arrangement.

Ardent backbench Leaver Andrea Jenkyns called on the Brexiteer Cabinet ministers to “show their steel” and block the blueprint, as she ominously warned that Mrs May could be ousted, saying: “Prime Ministers keep their jobs who keep their promises”.

Jacob Rees-Mogg led an angry deputation of 40 anti-EU Tory MPs from the eurosceptic European Reform Group to protest at Chief Whip Julian Smith yesterday morning.

Mr Smith was told during the stormy meeting that the Tories will be “toast if we welch on Brexit”.

Former Leave campaign boss Michael Gove insisted it was for the full Cabinet to decide whether her plan will go forward, in a veiled hint they could overrule the PM.

The Environment Secretary – who angrily ripped up a paper on her customs plan in No10 last week – would also not rule out Cabinet resignations, equivocally saying only when he was asked: “I don’t think so”.

Another minister predicted there would be resignations after the day-long Chequers showdown.

The former Remain backing minister told The Sun: “The time has come to chose.

“She cannot take everyone with her any more, so someone is going to walk”.

As tensions spiralled on all sides of the Tory party, Business Minister Richard Harrington insisted that no deal “would be completely disastrous for business” – deviating from the Government’s line.

Ministers such as Boris and Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt who attack firms for going public with their worries “don’t really understand how business works,” Mr Harrington added.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6698448/davis-may-brexit-plan-split/