Every Disney live-action remake in the works, from 'Dumbo' to 'The Lion King'
Though that Dumbo trailer currently has Disney fans erupting with excitement, the flying elephant isn't the only classic character soaring back into theaters. 
Christopher Robin will be released later this summer (August 3) and plenty of other classics—including Aladdin and The Lion King—are set to turn live-action next year. 
Considering the ever-expanding tidal wave of Disney live-actions, it might be easier to tell you which characters aren't getting revamps than which ones are. But we'll give it a shot anyway! 
Here's a rundown of every Disney live-action movie on the horizon and in the rumor mill as of June 13, 2018.
Completed
Christopher Robin (2018): Winnie the Pooh and the rest of the Hundred Acre Wood's residents star alongside a fully grown Christopher Robin (Ewan McGregor) in Marc Foster's new spin on an old favorite. This will be Foster's second major reimagining for Disney, after his 2004 film Finding Neverland earned $116.8 million at the box office.
Post-production
Aladdin (2019): Disney embarked on an international open casting call to find the perfect Aladdin and Jasmine for their remake of the 1992 animated favorite. Ultimately, director Guy Ritchie settled on Mena Massoud and Naomi Scott to play the iconic couple and A-lister Will Smith to portray the Genie. The movie has been kept tightly under wraps, but you can expect plenty of previews to roll in as Aladdin's May 24, 2019 premiere approaches.
Filming
The Lion King (2019): While this particular application of "live-action" may be a bit of stretch, Jon Favreau is taking a page from his own (jungle) book and remaking The Lion King in the same realistic animated style. The 2016 Jungle Book made nearly a billion dollars, and The Lion King seems primed to do the same. 
Donald Glover stars as Simba, Beyoncé will voice Nala, and James Earl Jones will reprise his role as Mufasa. HBO's rationality hype man John Oliver rounds out the cast as Zazu. In theaters July 19, 2019.
Maleficent II (TBA): The Sleeping Beauty inspired prequel raked in $758.5 million dollars, so it's no surprise Disney is keeping the dynamically drowsy franchise going. Though much of the production's details are locked away in a tower, we can expect Angelina Jolie and Elle Fanning back alongside newcomer Michelle Pfeiffer.
Pre-production
Mulan (2020): Disney's OG warrior princess is coming back to defeat the Huns a second time in a live-action take on the 1998 animated feature. Chinese actress Liu Yifei will play the titular heroine. The new film is receiving some suspicion from fans given the addition of a witch to the story's plot and the unexpected replacement of Mulan's love interest, Li Shang. 
Cruella (TBA): Aside from this uncomfortable sidestep at last year's BAFTAs, Emma Stone has kept quiet about her highly anticipated role as the 101 Dalmatians villain. So far we know to expect a prequel, akin to Maleficent, set in 1970s England. 
Pinocchio (TBA): It's a real movie! Rumors of the fibbing wooden boy returning to screen have swirled for months. Finally, in February, the film's director—Paul King of the Paddingtonmovies—was announced. Disney has said they hope to begin filming Pinnochio by the end of 2018.
Announced
Jungle Book 2 (TBA): Jungle Book will return with its core production leads Jon Favreau directing and Justin Marks writing the screenplay. Not much is known of the sequel's storyline, but Marks said the following to Slash Film: “There is so much more Kipling to adapt. I just finished a draft of [the script] quite recently. Even in the first film, we really looked to the other Kipling stories for inspiration, The Elephant and the history and the mythology and the creation of the jungle.”
The Little Mermaid (TBA): Too much is up in the air about this live-action reboot for us to even dream of an approaching premiere date or an official cast, but the musical talent involved is very promising. Hamilton's Lin-Manuel Miranda is teaming up with legendary Disney composer Alan Menken to bring moviegoers back under the sea.
Prince Charming (TBA): According to The Hollywood Reporter, Stephen Chbosky—the bestselling author of The Perks of Being a Wallflower—has committed to reimagining the eponymous Prince Charming. The real mystery here is which prince is so charming Disney gave him a reboot. My personal bet is on Phillip of Sleeping Beauty. Dude looks great in a cape.
Sword in the Stone (TBA): One of the last films completed before Walt Disney's death, The Sword in the Stone is an often overlooked Disney classic. The live-action remake is in its early stages, but Disney has already signed 28 Weeks Later director Juan Carlos Fresnadillo and Game of Thrones writer Bryan Cogman for the project.
Lady and The Tramp (TBA): This puppy love romance is returning—but to the small screen. The Lady and The Tramp reboot is expected to help pioneer Disney's new streaming service, which launches late next year. An official release date and price points for the service have yet to be made public. 
Snow White and The Seven Dwarfs (TBA): The tale of the beautiful maiden who charms wild creatures and briefly rooms with seven jewel miners has been told many times since its animated debut in 1937. Disney's first film will soon get a live-action makeover, complete with new songs.
Rumored
Tink (TBA): A fairy focused Peter Pan remake was announced in 2015. Shortly after, Reese Witherspoon's casting as Tinker Bell was announced. However, the lack of recent updates has some wondering if the project has been scrapped. Peter Pan is reported to be set for a live-action reboot as well, but it is unclear if Witherspoon and Tink are at all related.
Chip 'n' Dale (TBA): Disney's favorite chipmunks and their possible chance at the big screen haven't been revisited since rumors began floating a few years ago. The Hollywood Reporterannounced Disney's pick up of a script from director Robert Rugan in 2014.
Night on Bald Mountain (TBA): Fantasia holds a special place in any Disney superfan's heart and the Night on Bald Mountain sequence is considered by many to be one of the film's more iconic moments. Matt Sazama and Burk Sharpless were signed to write the full-length script adaptation as of 2015, but there appears to have been no movement on the project since.
James and the Giant Peach (TBA): In 2016, producer Sam Mendes was believed to be in talks with Disney to revitalize the story of an English boy traveling to New York City in a giant flying peach. Unfortunately for fans of the Roald Dahl tale, the revamp appears to be dead.
Bonus
Mary Poppins Returns (2018): The Julie Andrews classic was live-action to begin with, but many are ecstatic over Emily Blunt's casting as the magically strict nanny in Disney's upcoming sequel. Mary Poppins Returns will enter theaters on Christmas day.