 The Strange Death of John Doe review, Hampstead Theatre Downstairs: sensitive retelling of a very modern tragedy  

By Dominic Cavendish, Theatre Critic 

6 June 2018 3:44pm 



I grew up to the enervating roar of planes making their final descent towards Heathrow over East Sheen, a relatively affluent but anonymous south-west London suburb. What I hadn’t registered, before seeing Fiona Doyle’s new play, was a local incident that puts the hardship of noise pollution into stark, shaming relief. 

In September 2012, a young man, believed to hail from Mozambique, fell from within the wheel well of a BA flight from Angola, landing in Portman Avenue, one road away from where I once lived. His name was José Matada. He had a pound in his pocket along with a sim-card that showed he had been texting an Anglo-Swiss woman for whom he had once worked as a gardener in South Africa. 

Doyle – an Irish writer – has taken the bare bones of this harrowing instance of failed migration and fleshed it out with fiction. Deriving its title from a Forties folk-song, sung by Pete Seeger, about a mystery man who was “tall and long and his arms were strong”, The Strange Death of John Doe begins at the end of a life. At the start of Ed Hall’s production, we see Benjamin Cawley’s wiry yet delicate Ximo nestling into an undercarriage area that closes in on him, arrestingly conveyed by the pulling-together of gurneys by the pathologists who will tend to his corpse. 

The living probe the dead – the crunching of water-bottles and carving into plastic sheeting achieving the ghoulish simulation of dissection – and Ximo’s past becomes theatrically animated amid Michael Pavelka’s comfortless mortuary set. Glimpses of how he came to take that insane yet hope-filled risk are conjured partly through poetic licence, via flashbacks and quasi-supernatural intuitions, and partly through the attempts by a Met detective suspended for alcoholism to track down the woman with whom the lad had a marriage-busting liaison in Cape Town.


Doyle admits in the programme that she struggled with “the fact that I’m a white writer writing a story with a black man at the centre of it”. Perhaps she has tried too hard to compensate – her script is crammed with a cargo-load of supporting characters to the point where everyone starts to look like a walk-on part, including Ximo himself.

And yet the good intentions of a drama that ventures to map out a desperate, hazardous odyssey typical of the modern age count for a lot. At least Matada – and his unfortunate like – are being acknowledged. That’s not nothing.

Until July 7. For tickets call 020 7722 9301 or visit hampsteadtheatre.com

