STUCK ON THE MOTORWAY ‘Melting road’ ruins cars in Australia as vehicles are left ‘glued’ to the tarmac in heatwave

Dozens of wheels melded with the sticky tar leaving them unable to move

MOTORISTS in Australia were forced to abandon their cars when melting roads completely gummed up their tyres.

Tar stuck to the rubber of the vehicles in northern Queensland, leaving drivers unable to move as their wheels were ruined.

Tarmac melted on Millaa Millaa-Malanda Road in Tarzali, an hour and a half south of Cairns, leaving dozens of motorists stranded.

Local resident Deborah Stacey said "big globs" of tar had stuck to vehicles, amid the hot weather that followed several cooler days and rain.

She told the Courier Mail: "As soon as the sun came out, it started sticking... a lot of soft tar sprayed in big globs and sticking to truck wheels."

The road has been unsafe since a resurfacing job last week was ruined by wet weather, causing the bitumen to become loose and cracked.

Mrs Stacey: “It’s especially bad for holidaymakers who come up for the holidays and are stuck up here with tar dripping up the tyres.”

Others told of their motoring misery, as temperatures hit the high 80s.

Chris Smethurst told 7News: "My car won't move. The actual tyres won't go round.

"It's just picked up all the road, there's big actual chunks of road on my tyres."

A Department of Transport spokeswoman said the department was now working to fix the problem.

disease listeriosis
She said: “We are aware of issues with the recent reseal works.

“The section of road was temporarily closed to all traffic but has reopened two lanes with reduced speeds following emergency repairs.”

Last week, the DoT put a temporary reduced speed limit of 40mph on the stretch to prevent loose gravel from damaging driver’s windshields.

About 60 motorists have reportedly contacted the department seeking compensation for damage caused to their cars.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6703209/melting-road-australia-hot-weather-glues-vehicle-road/