Higher oil prices could be a game changer for Asia's trade-gap trio
Florence Tan, Marius Zaharia
SINGAPORE/HONG KONG (Reuters) - Asia’s most externally vulnerable economies - India, Indonesia and the Philippines - have just taken a one-two punch.
FILE PHOTO: A worker transporting kerosene in a bullock cart travels past Indian Oil Corporation's fuel depot in Mumbai July 8, 2010. REUTERS/Danish Siddiqui/File Photo
U.S. 10-year Treasury bond yields US10YT=RR hit 3 percent this week, a level long touted as one to watch for potential portfolio outflows from the region, where interest rates have barely shifted since the U.S. Federal Reserve began slowing hiking policy rates in late 2015.
An even bigger worry is that oil prices hit 3-1/2 year highs: not only do these countries run the biggest current account deficits of Asia’s major economies, but they are also among region’s most voracious oil importers.
If oil prices stay at their current levels of around $75 a barrel LCOc1, projections for inflation, growth, budget and trade deficits could be missed, increasing selling pressure on the trio’s currencies, stocks and bonds - already among Asia’s worst performers - and potentially forcing their central banks to raise interest rates sooner than they otherwise would.
Higher rates could, in turn, hurt growth and budgets, creating a self-feeding loop that further erodes confidence in local assets.
“If higher oil prices are sustained, interest rates will be raised faster than anticipated,” said Tilak Doshi, Singapore-based analyst at energy consultancy Muse, Stancil & Co.
In its projections for growth and inflation, Indonesia’s central bank said it works on an assumption of oil at $60 a barrel. The Philippines’ said it works with $55-$70, while India, according to two finance ministry sources, works with $65.
These averages might still be attained if oil prices drop back, but the recent run-up has prompted many analysts to call an end to the oil market slump that started in 2014 and prompted hints that policymakers’ assumptions are changing. [O/R]
In February, the Philippines central bank raised its 2018 inflation projection to 4.3 percent, from 3.4 percent previously, mainly due to higher oil prices, but expects this to be a temporary breach of its 2-4 percent target.
FILE PHOTO: A worker prepares to label barrels of lubricant oil at the state oil company Pertamina's lubricant production facility in Cilacap, Central Java, Indonesia November 6, 2017 in this photo taken by Antara Foto. Antara Foto/Rosa Panggabean/File Photo via REUTERS
At the start of the year, it was expected to raise interest rates once or twice in 2018. Now some analysts see three hikes. India and Indonesia were the last major central banks in Asia to cut rates last year and were mostly expected to stay put throughout 2018, but analysts say hikes are now on the table.
Indonesia said on Tuesday it had been selling foreign currency in “quite a sizeable amount” to halt the rupiah’s depreciation since last week. At an IMF meeting in Washington on Sunday, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) governor Urjit Patel flagged oil prices as a growing risk for inflation.
“Philippines – three interest rate hikes are expected in the next three meetings. If oil prices stay at these levels, then RBI may have to raise rates ... Indonesia is the next country to watch,” said Robert Subbaraman, chief economist for Asia ex-Japan at Nomura.

