GROPED ON TV Andy Dick gropes Ivanka Trump on TV in shocking resurfaced footage as he’s charged with fondling woman in the street

As cops confirmed the charges, a 2007 clip of him grabbing at President Trump's daughter has resurfaced

SHOCKING footage has re-emerged of a comedian groping Ivanka Trump on TV - as he's arrested for touching another girl in the street.

Andy Dick, 52, is accused of grabbing a girl's bum and making lewd comments in Los Angeles.

As cops confirmed the charges, a 2007 clip of him grabbing at President Trump's daughter has resurfaced.

In the shocking clip, Dick rubs Ivanka's legs and arm as she squirms awkwardly in her seat.

The pair were being interviewed on Jimmy Kimmel Live.

Jimmy swoops in several times during the madcap encounter, as Dick continues to make excuses to touch her.

Eventually show security swoop in, and Jimmy helps them carry Dick out of the studio as the audience applaud.

It is not clear if his sudden exit was a planned skit.

According to Kimmel, Dick asked Ivanka for a "big, wet kiss" as soon as he met her.

"It was time for Andy to go, so I escorted him out by his feet," he later said.

Dick, himself, even commented on the incident on Instagram in December.

He wrote: "The time I 'groped' Trump’s daughter, Ivanka, on Jimmy Kimmel Live.

"Her legs were sparkling, and I was trying to see if the glitter would wipe off.

"I also mistakenly thought she would date me. I was jokingly carried off by security."

He added: "Is anybody going to carry Trump off? No joke. Confusing times.'

Dick has been charged with misdemeanour sexual battery and misdemeanour simple battery related to an incident in April.

He is said to have grabbed a girl who passed him on the street.

Dick also allegedly groped people on the set of a movie he was working on last year, but he denied all claims.

her
“I didn’t grope anybody. I might have kissed somebody on the cheek to say goodbye and then licked them,” he admitted to The Hollywood Reporter. “That’s my thing — I licked Carrie Fisher at a roast. It’s me being funny. I’m not trying to sexually harass people.”

He was fired from the film.

The comedian was also arrested in 2008 when he allegedly groped a 17-year-old girl's breasts.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6699155/andy-dick-gropes-ivanka-trump-jimmy-kimmel/