SHEFFIELD STEELED Donald Trump banned from Sheffield during UK visit and labelled a ‘wasteman’ by city’s outspoken Lord Mayor

Magid Magid cited President’s ‘Muslim ban’ and detention of children at the border as the reason behind it – and declared the day of his arrival in Britain as ‘Mexico Solidarity Day’

DONALD Trump has been banned from Sheffield during his visit to the UK and labelled a “wasteman” by the city’s outspoken Lord Mayor.

Magid Magid cited the President’s “Muslim ban” and the detention of children at the border as the reason behind it – and declared the day of his arrival in Britain as “Mexico Solidarity Day”.

But the 28-year-old former refugee from Somalia, who took up the ceremonial post in May, has no actual power to stop an elected world leader from entering the city.

He tweeted: "I Magid Magid, Lord Mayor & first citizen of this city hereby declare that not only is Donald J Trump a WASTEMAN, but he is also henceforth banned from the great city of Sheffield!

"I further declare July 13th to be Mexico Solidarity Day!"

The Green Party councillor and former president of Hull University student union wore a sombrero in an attached picture of him in his office.

It is not the first time the eccentric politician has caught the eye with his fashion choices, after he wore a Tartan beret with the message “Immigrants Make Britain Great” last month.

He also urged his followers to join anti-Trump demonstrations, give money to anti-Trump organisations and lobby political leaders to oppose the controversial Republican.

The President is expected to face widespread protests in London on Thursday and Friday, which will include "a 12 hour rave organised by world-renowned DJs", campaign group Stand Up To Trump said.

And today London Mayor Sadiq Khan gave the green light for a giant “angry baby” version of Mr Trump to fly over Parliament when he arrives.

Speaking about his decision to ban the former real estate mogul, he told the Sheffield Star: “In this current climate of politics where fear and hate is widespread, the last thing we need is a world leader like Donald J Trump being a spurting cesspit of hate, stoking divisions between communities while scapegoating minorities.
"I am proud to be the Lord Mayor of a city where there is an amazingly culture of diversity.

“Where we don’t tolerate racism and xenophobia; where we not only celebrate all our differences but also unite on the things we have in common.

"We need now more than ever to come together in spite of our differences and empower everyone in our society and collectively work towards building a future where love and tolerance prevail, and where everybody belongs.”

group
He has previously hit the headlines after enlisting the help of a scientist who performed tricks during a tense council meeting.

The bizarre intervention came during a break in a heated debate about protesters who were arrested for trying to halt a programme of tree felling in the city.

And as a committed republican, he has previously pledged to take down the portrait of the Queen in his office and replace it with a picture of his mum.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6705536/donald-trump-banned-from-sheffield-during-uk-visit-and-labelled-a-wasteman-by-citys-outspoken-lord-mayor/