Jana Kramer reveals miscarriage struggles before current pregnancy
Jana Kramer is now pregnant with her second child, but in an emotional video Monday the country singer broke down in tears as she shared details on her four miscarriages and struggles with in vitro fertilization.

Kramer, 34, chronicled her pregnancy journeys in an 11-minute Youtube video that followed her taking IVF shots, revealing pregnancy tests and tearfully reacting to news that her last of three embryos didn’t take.

“Well just got the official call that it didn't work or that it implanted but the numbers didn't go up so this is real life,” the country star said through sobs. “It sucks.”


Kramer then revealed that she and her husband, Mike Caussin, were able to conceive naturally after the heartbreaking news. The couple officially revealed their second pregnancy on social media last month.


Kramer also opened up about the struggles of her first pregnancy.

“When Mike and I first got together, we were having trouble conceiving, so I went to the doctors and started the process of IVF,” the singer said. “We had only three embryos and we implanted the two embryos. I ended up getting pregnant but we had a very, very early chemical loss.”


But like her second pregnancy, the “One Tree Hill” actress and her husband were  able to conceive naturally. Their first child, Jolie, is now 2 years old.

Kramer has been pregnant twice after Jolie was born, but lost both pregnancies. After losing the second at nine weeks, Kramer shared her loss and discussed miscarriage in a tearful video clip.

“It’s sad because when you find out you’re pregnant it’s so exciting and you want to shout it and tell everybody but you don’t because of stuff like this. Instead, you’re left alone with this feeling of being so alone.”

- Jana Kramer
“That’s the problem with miscarriage, it’s not talked about and it should be,” Kramer said. “It’s sad because when you find out you’re pregnant it’s so exciting and you want to shout it and tell everybody but you don’t because of stuff like this. Instead, you’re left alone with this feeling of being so alone.”

Kramer said she documented the journey to her two pregnancies to help women who have faced similar issues “not feel so alone.”

“I want to be as open and honest and raw as possible and that’s why I’m doing this,” the country star said. “I wanted to show you guys my journey of becoming pregnant.”

The couple’s second child is due in November.