OnePlus 6 review: The best value handset that's just short of perfect\

Getting a decently priced smartphone has become a sore point for many people. Most top range handsets now come in well over £500 and leading brands have gone increasingly down a route of "people will pay anything" to have the very latest model.

Which is why OnePlus is always a refreshing smartphone launch to see. Its latest phone, the OnePlus 6 (confusingly its eighth phone in four years), comes in at £469. For what is a relative minnow of the technology world, OnePlus has challenged the bigger fish with its competitive pricing compared to many Android handsets and relied on viral and guerrilla marketing to make an impact in otherwise tough markets.

But does that make it any good? The company has brought in a handful of tweaks and changes on the OnePlus 6, not least embracing this year's most controversial smartphone design element, the "Notch".

Most of it works, some of it is a little behind the crowd. OnePlus remains a challenger among smartphone brands, but can it take the top spot?

Design and body
OnePlus has changed quite a lot design-wise on this latest version and I have to say I rather like it. The OnePlus 6 has gone back to the design seen on the OnePlus One and its later models like the 3T, with a central camera (dual lens) on the rear of the phone, rather like the eye of a cyclops. This goes against its previous design which many people accused of looking a bit too much like an iPhone.

The phone comes in three colours - all with a glass body: these are mirror black, midnight black and a rather stunning silk white finish. OnePlus rather excessively says this white was achieved by sprinkling pearl powder under the back of the phone to create a smooth, milky texture.

The fingerprint scanner is now a little smaller and sits on the back of the phone. Most of the unlocking is now done with facial recognition - Face Unlock - even in near darkness. I find myself using it 90 per cent of the time.

The OnePlus 6 has also shifted its alert slider on to the right hand side of the phone, which can let you flick between silent, vibrate and sound modes. OnePlus says this makes sense for the vast majority of phone users, but if you are left-handed like me it actually makes the phone more uncomfortable to use.

The front has also seen the big design change. The screen is bigger than what we have previously seen, continuing the broad trend of "bigger is better", unlikely to end any time soon. We also have another flagship that has embraced Apple's most controversial design element, the "Notch".

Notch and screen
Not everyone was blown away by Apple's design choice back in September. The little cut-out at the top of the iPhone X was bemoaned for cutting the top off some apps. But Apple largely got away with the design choice because the X's screen was so bright and punchy. 

OnePlus doesn't quite achieve that level of excellence. Its screen is still good with 2280 x 1080 pixels, but it lacks the pixel density you are seeing on the very top models and it shows.

The Notch is probably just a matter of taste and using it you can spot some Android apps that are not optimised. It does push certain aspects like the clock and battery life up above the main body of the screen, which is practical.

The Notch can be switched on or off. One of the main issues is that since the Notch is now the home for your notifications screen it can become cluttered quite quickly and require you to scroll down anyway to see useful stats like battery percentage. 

Need for speed
Performance and pace have always been OnePlus's forte, done by absolutely packing the phone with power. This time around their marketing jargon is headlined by "The Speed You Need". The OnePlus 6 comes with a Snapdragon 845 processor and up to 8GB of RAM, which is more than plenty for anyone. It can also be upgraded for up to 256GB of storage if you ever have need for that much.

Battery life is also an area where it has kept up the pace. It has always been in the top quartile of battery performers, and the OnePlus 6 boasts close to a day and a half of battery life. Anecdotally it does feel like it needed a little more juice than the other OnePlus phones I've tested (other reviewers have noted similar).

It also comes with Dash Charge, OnePlus's fast charge solution. This remains pretty much a miracle, which needs its own custom charger to work. You can achieve more than 50 per cent battery in under half an hour, which gives you a day of battery life on moderate use. With battery life top of most phone-buyers list, OnePlus still scores highly.

Despite the glass body there is no wireless charging, which for me is a feature, not a necessity. If you really want it you'll have to look elsewhere.

Camera, software and gestures
OnePlus has always housed a decent camera, but in the latest model not a great deal has changed since it swapped to a dual lens design like many other leading flagships. It comes with a dual 16MP and 20MP camera, while OnePlus says it has made its sensor 19 per cent large to compete with other models on low-light photography.

I can't say it has quite worked out like that. The OnePlus 6 never quite gave me the social media-ready low-light shots I was looking for and I don't think it stacks up against some other premium models. The pictures are not overprocessed like some other Chinese smartphones, however.

OnePlus has also added improved slow motion and it can now shoot in slo-mo at up to 480 frames per second. This is not quite as much as some other phones, but its a neat feature that is fun to play around with. It also comes with Portrait mode that blurs out the background to make faces stand out. 

One slight niggle I found with the OnePlus was in the camera software. When zooming in the camera froze on several occasions and needed shutting off completely. I am sure this was just a software fault that can be ironed out, but it was far from ideal. 

On software, OnePlus uses Oxygen OS, its own version of Android with some extra bells and whistles, like more swipe and tap controls. For example, you can flip your phone over to mute it. This doesn't really change the running of Android, which is my personal preference. OnePlus is also slated as getting Android P ahead of many other releases, but it has a sketchy track record of launching software updates at the same pace as rivals.

A final major upgrade in how I used this model is in gesture controls. These again are lifted from the likes of the iPhone, but provide a different way to navigate the phone, removing the virtual home button and letting you swipe up to return home or swipe and hold to see your app cards. 

Again, you can switch this option off to use the navigation buttons, so you have more flexibility, but the gestures do seem a little unpolished right now. It's not very easy to swipe back to your last app and more often than not I found myself unintentionally returning to the home screen. I think it's a great idea but gestures feel like a work in progress, rather than a core part of the experience.

Verdict
With the OnePlus 6 there are plenty of pros and only a few cons, even before you get on the to the price. It's still arguably the best mid-range Android phone around.

However there are a few little annoyances which mean this isn't a perfect choice for everyone. There is no waterproofing, although it does keep the headphone jack. It only comes in a large screen size, many people will want something smaller and OnePlus can't provide that. The camera is also not up there with the best we have seen this year.

That said, it's hard to argue with the £469 price tag with so much packed inside. It is only available in the UK on O2, and so the price of contracts is higher than many other devices due to the exclusivity, but if you want to buy the handset outright it represents true value for money.

Should you buy this phone over other Android handsets? There are very few aspects where others can say "I do it better" and OnePlus avoids gimmicks like Animoji that rivals rely on, instead giving us a functional, fast phone. Versus the very best handsets it does cut some corners, but among mid-range rivals this is the smartphone to beat.

Pros: Value for money, lightning fast performance, superb battery life

Cons: Camera is only middling, not sold on the notch, gestures need work
