ADV Press Release re: Sailor Moon, Announces Dirty Pair Flash DVD
2000-10-25 06:02 UTC-8
News of ADV Films' aquisition of the first Sailor Moon TV series first came in from Anime Weekend Atlanta on October 11th. 
Now ADV has issued an official press release about the aquisition and the releases.

ADV Also announced today the upcoming DVD release of Dirty Pair Flash (see below).

ADV Press release:

ADV Films is proud to announce their recent acquisition of the home video rights to the first 82 episodes of Sailor Moon, 
the #1 television series for girls on the Cartoon Network's "Toonami" programming block, from DiC Entertainment.

Sailor Moon is the story of Serena, a junior high school student who discovers that she has mystical powers and is destined to 
protect the world from the evil Queen Beryl and the fiends of the Negaverse. Gradually, 
Serena assembles a team of Sailor Scouts to help her battle the forces of darkness in the name of Queen Serenity of the Emperium. 
Sailor Mercury, Sailor Mars, Sailor Venus and Sailor Jupiter round out the rest of Sailor Moon's team. Sailor Moon is given her powers by Luna, 
a trusted advisor of Queen Serenity, who takes the form of Serena's cat and sticks with her through thick and thin.

The Sailor Scouts must take on the dwellers of the Negaverse, while also dealing with the problems of adolescence. 
Bad grades and crushes at Crossroads Junior High can be just as fearsome as the forces of evil. All the while, 
Serena moves slowly toward her destiny, to save the universe as Neo-Queen Serenity in the name of the Moon. It's not easy being a pretty soldier.

An anime sensation that has appeared in the "Lycos Top 50" consecutively for the past 41 weeks, 
Sailor Moon is a proven multi-billion dollar brand in specialty and mass channels, with products ranging from toys and games to clothing and school supplies. 
Sailor Moon appears Monday through Friday at 4:30 p.m. on the Cartoon Networkduring the "Toonami" block of programming, and is seen by over 1.1 million viewers a day. 
Cartoon Network also airs Sailor Moon on Saturday mornings at 11:00 a.m.

Next month, ADV Films will begin releasing the 82 original episodes of the fabulous Sailor Moon television series. 
The first 2 VHS cassettes, which include 4 episodes each, will be released on November 21st and will contain the English-dubbed, 
family/children friendly version of the show, as seen on television. 
Each tape will introduce episodes never before seen on home video and will carry the suggested retail price of $12.98 each. 
Other VHS volumes will follow shortly thereafter.

Sailor Moon: The Legend Begins and Sailor Moon: The Power of Friendship
Running Time (both tapes): 90 minutes Rating: ALL AGES

Street Date: 11/21/00
Both Priced at $12.98 SRP


David Williams of ADV made the following announcement on Anime on DVD's forum today:

The Dirty Pair Flash: Angels in Trouble DVD has been given a street date of 11/28/00. 
This disc contains all 6 episodes of the show released on VHS as Dirty Pair FlashActs 1, 2 and 3 with an approx runtime of 160 mins. 
English and Japanese audio with English subs. Extras include Production Portfolio, Textless Openning, Character Bios, 
and all three of the original 3 ADV DP Flash Trailers. SRP is $29.98.


According to David the DVD will not have any digital overlays. He also says that ADVis shooting for one back catalog disc a week!
