Royal Ascot 2018: What our experts are most looking forward to 

Marcus Armytage

Racing Writer

“The big sprints; Lady Aurelia against Battaash in today’s King’s Stand; Equilateral, Sioux Nation and Sands Of Mali in the Commonwealth plus Harry Angel versus Redkirk Warrior in the Diamond Jubilee. My two eldest children, aged 13 and 12, are making their Royal Ascot debut on Saturday and I will be interested to hear what they make of it. I did not go for the first time until my 20s.” 
Oli Bell

Host of ITV Racing’s Opening Show at 9.30 each morning for Ascot on ITV4

“The Gold Cup. I have wonderful memories of last year’s race when Big Orange, trained by my uncle Mike Bell, just hung on from Order Of St George. Sadly he is not here this year but it still looks a great race. Order Of St George is back with a point to prove. He is against Stradivarius, the up-and-coming four-year-old, Vazirabad, the leading French stayer who has to be produced late by Christophe Soumillon, and the all-conquering Jessica Harrington’s Torcedor.”

Sir Anthony McCoy

20-time Champion jump jockey

“After last year when it was very hot for the first few days I have had some new, lighter, tails made so I’m looking forward to giving them an outing. I am working for ITV on Gold Cup day and that is a fascinating contest, but the race that always comes up trumps for me is today’s Coventry Stakes for two-year-olds. It’s usually won by a horse that turns out to be one of the best juveniles of the season. If it was not run so early in the year I’m sure it would be a Group One race.”
Jilly Cooper

Author

“I am heartbroken. I have had to turn down three invites to Royal Ascot this year. I love Ascot, I love racing, but I’m now writing a book about footballers so I am going to have to stay at home and watch the World Cup. Would you believe it? It’s only for research purposes though!”
Johnny Weatherby

Her Majesty’s Representative at Ascot

“It is the anticipation of the best racing anywhere in the world that I look forward to as much as anything this morning. It is a very important week for owners, trainers, breeders and jockeys and all those who look after their equine superstars. It will be very quiet on the track early this morning before everyone arrives but there will be a palpable buzz about the place, which everyone can feel. The Ascot team have done a brilliant job – bring it on.”


Frankie Dettori

Leading Royal Ascot jockey with 56 winners

“I am just looking forward to being there. This time last year I had broken my shoulder, which was very hard to take. This time I have covered myself in bubble-wrap and been very selective about my rides. Royal Ascot is the pinnacle. The Epsom Derby is one race, Royal Ascot is 30 races over five days and there is something for everyone; young, old, colts, fillies, sprinters, stayers, milers and it’s very international. We are all sitting in our chairs with a great book of rides but it is very hard to win and we take nothing for granted but I am going to enjoy it.”
John McCririck

Former television pundit

“I’m looking forward to two horses in particular and they both run today; Calyx (Coventry, 3.05) and Romanised (St James’s Palace, 4.20).

I have never seen a maiden winner so hyped as Calyx but from what I saw at Newmarket he can live up to expectations. I thought Romanised was an extraordinary winner of the Irish 2,000 Guineas. He came from last to first. Did they go too fast and the race fell apart? To me, he looks a colossal each-way bet.”

