'VILIFYING RUSSIA' Russian media claim Amesbury Novichok poisoning attack was ‘curiously timed’ to damage the ‘good publicity’ of the World Cup

'It seems to be the British government trying to go out of the way to link the two cases so they can somehow blame Russia,' an expert said

RUSSIAN media has reported the new Novichok attack was 'curiously timed' to damage the good publicity around the World Cup in Moscow.

It's also claimed the British government is "going out of the way" to link the nerve agent attack on Sergei and Yulia Skripal in March and the poisoning of Dawn Sturgess and Charlie Rowley last Saturday.

RUSSIAN media has reported the new Novichok attack was 'curiously timed' to damage the good publicity around the World Cup in Moscow.

It's also claimed the British government is "going out of the way" to link the nerve agent attack on Sergei and Yulia Skripal in March and the poisoning of Dawn Sturgess and Charlie Rowley last Saturday.

He added it was "inevitable" that Russia will be dragged into the case, but "it makes no sense... Trying to link them to Russia is just absurd," he said.

The comments come as Russia's embassy to the Netherlands said Britain is foolish if it believes Russia staged a new nerve agent attack in England in the middle of the soccer World Cup.

The British authorities have not accused Russia of involvement in the new incident, saying their working assumption is that the Britons were poisoned by traces of nerve agent left over from the original attack.

On Twitter, the embassy said: "How dumb (do) they think (Russia) is to use 'again' so-called 'Novichok' in the middle of the FIFA World Cup...The show must go on?"

A Kremlin official has also categorically denied any involvement in the Salisbury and Amesbury poisoning, claiming British officials ignored Russia's offer of a joint investigation into the nerve agent attack.

According to Russian media, press secretary of the Russian president, Dmitriy Peskov said: "Russia categorically denied and continues to deny categorically the possibility of any involvement in what was happening there."

"There has been no conclusive evidence of Russia's unfounded accusations of involvement in this from the British side, and you know that from the very beginning the Russian side offered a joint investigation to the British counterpart, and this proposal remained without any response."

Separately, Sergei Zheleznyak, deputy speaker of the State Duma, Russia's lower house of parliament, told state TV that the new poisoning incident in Britain looked like an attempt to spoil England soccer fans' positive perception of Russia.

Russia is hosting the tournament, which ends on July 15, for the first time.

Zheleznyak said Britain needed to whip up an hysteria to distract attention from what its intelligence services were doing.

Security chiefs are investigating whether the latest Novichok victims stumbled across a discarded container or syringe used to carry Novichock used by state assassins against ex-Russian spy Sergei Skripal in Salisbury.

Police are now desperately searching for the deadly poison as questions are raised over whether a multi-million decontamination programme in the town failed.

A friend of the couple said they fell ill after touching an item in Queen Elizabeth Gardens in Salisbury and "went into a zombie-like state" while "foaming at the mouth".

The park was outside the original decontamination zone and Security Minister Ben Wallace has called on the Russia to come clean about 'their reckless attack'.

The incident comes after former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter, Yulia, were left poisoned by a suspected military nerve agent in Salisbury, which is around seven miles from Amesbury.

Mr Skripal, 67, and his daughter, 33, were left in a critical condition after they were found slumped on a bench in Salisbury city centre on March 4.

They spent weeks in Salisbury District Hospital where they underwent treatment for suspected exposure to the Russian-created nerve agent Novichok.

The British Government accused Russia of being behind the attack on Mr Skripal, who settled in the UK after a spy swap.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/worldnews/6701448/russian-media-claim-amesbury-poisoning-novichok-fake-news/