Starbucks chairman Howard Schultz to step down after 36 years amid speculation of presidential bid

Starbucks chairman Howard Schultz will leave the company at the end of this month, stoking speculation he could be set to launch a presidential bid.

Mr Schultz, who has been at the helm of the coffee chain for almost four decades and was instrumental in transforming the business into a household name, will be replaced by Myron Ullman, the former chairman and chief executive of JC Penney.

Mr Schultz had previously served as chief executive of Starbucks, and only became chairman last year, handing the CEO role over to Kevin Johnson. 

Writing to employees to announce his resignation from the chairman post, Mr Schultz said he had "set out to build a company that my father, a blue-collar worker and World War II veteran, never had a chance to work for".

During his 36-year tenure, Starbucks has grown from 11 stores to more than 28,000 stores across 77 countries.

In the memo, he also suggested that he may pursue a career in politics once he leaves the coffee giant, adding fuel to speculation he could be preparing for a 2020 presidential bid as a Democratic candidate.

He wrote: "I’ll be thinking about a range of options for myself, from philanthropy to public service, but I’m a long way from knowing what the future holds."

In an interview with The New York Times, he added that he was focused on finding a role in which he could give something back. 

“For some time now, I have been deeply concerned about our country – the growing division at home and our standing in the world," he said. 

"One of the things I want to do in my next chapter is to figure out if there is a role I can play in giving back. I'm not exactly sure what that means yet."

Rumours have been swirling that Mr Schultz could have political ambitions for a while, and last year he spoke out about his dislike of President Donald Trump saying he was "a president that is creating episodic chaos every day". 

He was also critical of the Republican tax plan at the end of last year, saying it was a "fool's gold".

"I don’t believe corporate America needs a 20pc tax cut when in fact you’re not doing anything to help students, you’re taking away that benefit, and you’re [reducing] the mortgage benefit and so many people in America are living paycheck to paycheck," he told a conference in New York. 

When asked by The Sunday Telegraph earlier this year what people underestimated in him, he said: "I think my growing concern for humanity. That’s not something I talk about a great deal but I’m very concerned. I think it’s a very volatile time in the world. I think there’s a void of leadership and most importantly of what is true. We need authentic leadership."