WannaCry hero Marcus Hutchins 'admitted to writing banking code'

The British computer expert who helped shut down the WannaCry cyber attack on the NHS admitted writing code which was used to harvest bank details, according to documents filed with a US court.

Marcus Hutchins, 23, is alleged to have said in a phone call from prison that he had written code as a teenager that was turned into malicious software that US prosecutors said harvested banking details.

Hutchins, from Ilfracombe, Devon, is accused of six counts of creating and distributing the malware known as Kronos and faces a maximum 40 years in prison.

The computer whizz, who is known online as Malwaretech, denies the charges and his lawyers argue the call is inadmissible as evidence as he had been "coerced" by investigators.

Hutchins was arrested by FBI agents in a first-class lounge in August last year at McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas as he waited to board a flight back to the UK after attending a computer security conference.

Documents filed by US prosecutors on Tuesday contain a transcript of a telephone call made from jail hours later with an unidentified individual.

Hutchins allegedly said: "So I wrote code for a guy a while back who then incorporated it into a banking malware, so they have logs of that, and essentially they want to know my part of the banking operation or if I just sold the code on to some guy... once they found I sold the code to someone, they wanted me to give them his name, and I don't actually know anything about him."

Hutchins also reportedly said that logs of an online chat showed he had also given software called "compiled binary" to someone "to repay a debt" of "about five grand".

The debt arose from a software glitch which meant Hutchins lost Bitcoin he was holding on behalf of another person.

According to the transcript, Hutchins said: "I think the coding part I was less than 18, but I think giving him the binary I might have been older than 18."

He added: "I knew it was always going to come back, I just didn't think it would be so soon."

The cyber expert was hailed as a hero in May last year when he found a "kill-switch" that slowed the effects of the WannaCry virus that hit more than 300,000 computers in 150 countries.

The investigation into the banking malware predates that attack and is completely unrelated, officials said.

The FBI claims that Hutchins created the Kronos malware before conspiring with another defendant, whose name has not been disclosed, to advertise and sell it on internet forums.

The unnamed defendant sold the software for 2,000 dollars (£1,500) in cryptocurrency, according between July 2014 and July 2015, an indictment from July 2017.

Hutchins is due to appeal for the telephone call transcript, along with post-arrest statements, to be dismissed from legal proceedings at a hearing on Wednesday.

Lawyers argue that “the government coerced Mr Hutchins, who was sleep-deprived and intoxicated, to talk”. They claim that as a British citizen he did not understand warnings about how comments he made would affect his case.

About | WannaCry
What is it?
Also known as Wanna Decryptor or wcry, it is a piece of malicious software that encrypts files on a user's computer, blocking them from view and threatening to delete them unless a payment is made.

How is it installed?
The virus made it onto computers thanks to a vulnerability in Windows that was exploited using a tool named EternalBlue, believed to be first developed by America's NSA. Many computers had not been updated with protection against the exploit.

What does it do?
Once opened, the virus is able to encrypt files and block user access to them, displaying a pop-up window on-screen telling users they have been blocked and demanding payment - often via a digital currency such as Bitcoin.

Can you remove it without paying?
Yes, by using advanced anti-malware software. The malware can also be removed manually with a computer in "safe mode", however security experts warn this runs the risk of damage to a PC as users must go through sensitive system files in order to find and isolate files created by the Wanna Decryptor software.

Source: PA