THE BEAUTIFUL DAMES They’re tall, slim, blonde and sex mad… the science of why Swedish people are the sexiest in the world
The stunning Swedish stereotype is as old as time itself, but there's actually plenty of truth to the claim that the Swedes are among the most attractive people on Earth
WE'RE not talking about vegetables when we say the Swedes are a tasty bunch.

And at Saturday's World Cup clash, in the stands, at least, the beautiful game will be at its most stunning.

Sweden isn't just known for its meatballs and flat-pack furniture - Swedes are among the most attractive people on the planet.

The country's tiny nine million population includes gorgeous singers Zara Larsson and Tove Lo.

And this week, an Instagram account called HelloIAmFromSweden has been sharing photos of yet more stunning Swedish models as they cheer on the national team, posing in the iconic yellow strip.

But as our young lions prepare for the weekend, we reveal the incredible scientific reasons why Swedish people are just so much hotter than us Brits.
They've got two extra inches where it counts
There's a reason Swedish women look so leggy - they tower over most other people on the planet.

The average Swedish man stands at a little over 5 ft 11ins, with a typical woman growing to 5 ft 5ins.

Meanwhile, the English measure up at a comparatively stubby 5 ft 9ins for men and 5 ft 3ins for women.
Height, of course, can play a big role in how attractive someone is, while long legs are also a sign of genetic health.

Nutrition is another big reason why certain people end up taller than others, and Scandinavian diets are often very well balanced and calorie rich, which helps to encourage growth.

80 per cent of them are natural blondes
Imagine a Swedish woman and you can probably picture someone with long, Barbie-blonde locks.

Studies have suggested that as many as 80 per cent of Swedes have fair hair, and everyone knows the tropes about blondes having more fun.

Our ancestors were hardwired to prefer blondes because they stood out from the crowd, and studies have suggested that blonde women tend to look a bit younger than they are.

Lighter hair is naturally more common in sunlight-deficient areas like Scandinavia - where there is around-the-clock darkness in the north's long winters.

Blonde hair, which has less pigmentation than dark hair, is better at processing Vitamin D, so the inhabitants of Northern European countries evolved lighter locks to make the most of the unreliable sunlight.

They've got the world's most beautiful eyes
Only eight per cent of the world's population has blue eyes - but in Sweden, a recent survey in found that figure rises to 79 per cent.

Just like with their hair, pale eyes allow Swedes to make the most of the light available dark winters.

Scientists suggest that blue eyes attract more mating opportunities - as surveys show humans see blue as the most attractive eye colour.

Overall, 34 per cent of British people find blue the most attractive eye colour, with brown at 19 per cent and green, 14 per cent.

They have a natural glow
According to another survey, Britishs are most envious of the Swedes' glowing complexions, rating them the most attractive of all other nations.

As well as a nutrient-rich diet - including a lot of herring and other fish oils which help maintain glowing skin - the Swedish tend to have higher cheekbones than the Brits, giving them natural contour and highlights.

They also love making their own organic beauty products, with ingredients like brown sugar, oatmeal, honey and eucalyptus oils.

Plus they're a stylish bunch
Snappy dressing is a surefire way to up your sex appeal, and the Swedes aren't a sloppy bunch, fashion wise.

The Brit fashion pack can't get enough of Swedish imports like Acne, Cheap Monday and Fillippa K.

Both men and women in Sweden are known for taking pride in their appearance without being too vain - and there are few things more attractive than good looking people who manage to not be completely up themselves.


Eight in ten of them are sex mad
You wouldn't guess it from their understated way of life, but the Swedes are saucier than an IKEA meatball.

Last year, 78 per cent of Swedish women claimed they had a high sex drive when they were polled for a survey of international attitudes towards sex.

That's eight per cent more women than in Britain - so we're not talking about assembling flat-pack wardrobes when we say the Swedes are good in the bedroom.

Sex is known to slow the ageing process, reduce wrinkles and burn calories. It's no wonder they're all glowing.

 Plenty of Swedish fellas, like Altered Carbon actor Joel Kinnaman, are good looking tooSPLASH NEWS
12
Plenty of Swedish fellas, like Altered Carbon actor Joel Kinnaman, are good looking too
 Standing at 5ft 10ins, Elsa Hosk is typically tall for a Swedish womanGETTY IMAGES - GETTY
12
Standing at 5ft 10ins, Elsa Hosk is typically tall for a Swedish woman

They're a perfect 12
Where the average British woman is a size 16, most women in Sweden take a size 12.

The Swedes enjoy a balanced diet including national favourites like oily fish, boiled potatoes and lingonberries, and are a very active bunch.

Exercise is promoted heavily in Sweden, and many Swedes will tell you that the best way to endure the long, dark winters is by getting off your sofa and going on a long run.

As a result, their obesity rate is less than half of the UKs at just 12 per cent - so the average person is in cracking shape.