COULD COPS HAVE DONE MORE? Police watchdog launches probe into handling of Gaia Pope’s rape allegation before teen was found frozen to death

Gaia, 19, went to Dorset police in December 2015 and alleged that she had been raped by a young man. But six months later officers told her they were not taking the matter any further and dropped the case

COPS are being probed into the way they handled an allegation of rape that was made by tragic teenager Gaia Pope before her death, it has been revealed today.

Gaia went to Dorset Police officers in December 2015 and alleged that she had been raped by a young man

But six months later officers told the 19-year-old they were dropping the case.

She then disappeared in November last year after becoming worried at the prospect of the suspect being released from prison for an unrelated sex offence.

Her partially-clothed body was found by a clifftop path near her home in Swanage, Dorset, 11 days after she went missing.

Gaia's family had already questioned why it took police so long to find Gaia in an area that had previously been searched by them.

The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) is already investigating Dorset Police's handling of the search.

Today it announced it will also look into how officers handled Gaia's sexual assault claims two years earlier.

Gaia's family spoke of their relief that the matter is finally being investigated properly.

Mum Natasha Pope, said: "There is no doubt in my mind: this is what drove Gaia up the hill that night.

"I am relieved that at last, it will be properly investigated and I am resolved to see positive change.

"It was not her intention but in a way, my daughter gave her life to shine a light on all this."

Dad Richard Sutherland added: "We need to know if more could have been done to make Gaia feel safe and protect the public.

"Nothing can bring her back to us but a thorough, transparent and unbiased investigation will help us move forwards. We need to know the truth."

The man Gaia claimed had raped her was later sentenced to two years in prison for charges relating to taking an indecent image of a child under 18.

He and a friend had filmed themselves having sex with their victim and then posted the video on social media.

Gaia's family said she developed symptoms of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder after the alleged rape and failed investigation and was "living in fear" of the man being released.

On the day she disappeared, November 7 last year, she was in an agitated state and displaying erratic behaviour. She was last seen alive on CCTV running down a street in Swanage.

It is thought she walked about two miles to the cliffs at Dancing Ledge, a favourite haunt of Gaia's, and removed some of her clothes.

A large-scale search involving police, the coastguard and a search helicopter, as well as hundreds of volunteers, was launched.

Gaia's body was found in scrubland on the cliff top on November 18, close to where items of her clothing had been found two days earlier.

An inquest opened into her death in February this year gave the cause of death as hypothermia.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6703162/gaia-pope-rape-allegtion-police-probe-response/