Police release surveillance footage of suspect in North York shooting
A man suspected of killing Toronto resident Karim Hirani was caught on tape before and after the shooting, Toronto Police revealed Wednesday.

Security camera footage from around 3:30 a.m. on July 8 shows a man, believed to be in his 20s, wearing a light-coloured hoodie and dark pants, driving into a parking lot and exiting the car. Police believe the shooting then occurred off camera.
It’s been two years since the Supreme Court of Canada imposed strict time limits on criminal trials, citing a “culture of complacency” among governments that has left the justice system underfunded and under-reformed for too long.

Since then people charged with child abuse, murder, manslaughter, sexual assault against minors and many other horrible crimes have been set free, their guilt untested, when their cases dragged on for too long.
Uber Technologies Inc. pushed out its human-resources chief after an internal investigation into her department’s handling of racial discrimination claims, according to people familiar with the company’s actions.
A plurality of Americans already want Kavanaugh confirmed, according to a Rasmussen poll. The numbers will likely improve once Americans get a closer look at this temperate, intelligent, decidedly non-scary nominee. And Democrats will again play to type as mindless obstructionists and one-note alarmists — the same overheated opposition that, as the Times’s Jeremy Peters reported last month, only hardens support for Trump.

EDITORS’ PICKS

The Big Business of Becoming Bhad Bhabie

Athens, Rising

These Transgender Recruits Are Ready. The Military Isn’t.
ADVERTISEMENT


What about rallying the base? Democrats should have learned in 2016 that what counts in American politics is location, not turnout. Virtue signaling in Park Slope isn’t going to win a Senate election in Nevada. Nor will it convince Alabama Democrat Doug Jones to vote against Kavanaugh.

As it is, how much more rallying does the base need? The Trump administration provides its opponents, and even its friends, with daily extravaganzas of legitimate outrage, moral and political: breaking up migrant families; escalating needless trade wars; alienating historic allies while kowtowing to pathological dictators — and that’s just the last few weeks. Instead of knee-jerk opposition to Kavanaugh, Democrats might focus on fighting battles that must be fought and which they can win.

Kavanaugh deserves confirmation. There was a time when Supreme Court nominees were confirmed on the basis of merit, not ideology. For Democrats, that ended in 1987 with the Borking of Bork. For Republicans, it ended with the mistreatment of Merrick Garland.

Yet there’s still such a thing as doing the right thing, even in politics. Justices such as Roberts and Gorsuch deserved their seats on the court for the same reason Ginsburg and Breyer did — they are competent, conscientious judges, irrespective of how they vote. They give the court its democratic legitimacy, and its leeway for meaningful independence, by representing a spectrum of views. Democrats would help themselves, and the country, by returning to the old standard and refusing to let Kavanaugh’s confirmation become the political event of the season.
The departure of Liane Hornsey, who joined Uber in early 2017 from SoftBank Group Corp., was announced to staff Tuesday in an email from Uber Chief Executive Dara Khosrowshahi. The email, reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, praised her as “talented, creative and hardworking.”