RAPED ON NIGHT OUT Chilling CCTV shows married City worker carrying ‘too drunk to walk’ clubber, 18, down alleyway before raping her in 30-minute ordeal

Financial consultant Sanjay Naker jailed for eight years for savage attack

CCTV footage shows a City worker carrying an 18-year-old clubber on his shoulders and dragging her down an alley before he raped her repeatedly.

Married Sanhat Naker, 28, left the "too drunk to walk" teenager unconscious and soaked in vomit after pouncing when she was thrown out of a nightclub.

The PricewaterhouseCoopers consultant was lurking outside the bar and feigned concern before trying to kiss her and slinging her over his shoulder.

He dragged her away from the Number 1 venue in London's Tooley Street, took her to an alley where he forced her to perform sex acts in a savage 30-minute ordeal.

A passerby found Naker at 4.45am standing over his half-naked victim and zipping up his trousers as she lay unconscious and covered in urine and vomit.

He told cops the teenager was “really horny” and begged him for sex, but jurors saw her drunken state on CCTV and today he was jailed for eight years.

The trial saw footage of the teenage victim staggering about and falling in a gutter after being denied re-entry to the club.

Neena Crinnion, prosecuting, said Naker had also been denied entry and was “loitering” outside.

She told jurors: “He managed to manoeuvre her on to his back, into a piggyback position, and he is off across the road and down towards the passageway.”

The footage shows the victim slumped over Naker’s back, then falling to the ground. She then appears to try to get away before he drags her by the arms out of view.

Ms Crinnion said: “Even in her drunken state she managed to push him off. She started to claw her way along the wall.

“Mr Naker gets hold of her and drags her along the walkway. When passersby come along, he leaves her alone but as soon as they are out of view he goes back to get her."

After the rape, the prosecutor said: “He quickly got off the ground and fastened his trousers then took a minicab to the home he shares with his wife."

Sentencing today, judge Freya Newberry told Naker: "It was quite clear that you decided that you wanted to have sex with her and you saw an opportunity.

"It was a mixture of your own desire and arrogance regardless of any intoxication on your part.

"You took her to a filthy secluded corner, and the CCTV footage which is compelling to my mind, shows that she could barely stand up.

"It shows she fell and banged her head, and even in her intoxicated state, she was trying to get away from you.

"You dragged her to a chosen spot, using some force, and for half an hour you repeatedly raped and sexually assaulted her.

"She has been left anxious and afraid, reclusive and scared and really repulsed by an idea of any intimate relationships."

The 18-year-old college student had joined her cousin on a night out to celebrate a birthday on March 11 last year.

The last thing she remembered was standing in the smoking area with her cousin at the club and then staring at a brick wall in the alley.

She woke the next day in hospital and "felt really scared" as she learnt she had been kissing a man she had met in the club's VIP area but had no recollection of it.

She sobbed as the told the court: “I did not remember having sexual intercourse with anyone that night.

“I do not go clubbing very often and I don't drink that much.

“It was like I was drugged or something and my head hurt so I thought I might have hit it at some point."

Naker told police the sex was consensual and said the woman had not appeared drunk.

He admitted later searching online for a definition of the word “rape” but said it reassured him he had done nothing wrong.

Naker, of Wood Green, North London, denied wrongdoing but was found guilty or three counts of rape, attempted rape and sexual assault after at a trial at Inner London Crown Court.

