NATO Summit Live Updates: Trump Calls U.S. Ties to Alliance ‘Very Strong’
• Mr. Trump said that the allies at the NATO summit meeting had agreed to his demand for a significant increase in military spending. But he offered no specifics, and President Emmanuel Macron of France refuted the claim.

• Mr. Trump signed a joint statement that largely reaffirmed existing NATO commitments, and that was at odds with some of his own statements.

• On the final day of the talks, Mr. Trump turned a heads-of-state meeting with Georgia and Ukraine into an argument about spending, prompting an emergency budget meeting.

• President Trump is on a seven-day, three-nation European trip — to Belgium, Britain and then Finland for talks with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia — that highlights the ways he has utterly transformed United States foreign policy.

Continue reading the main story
Advertisement

Continue reading the main story
• The New York Times has live coverage of his trip, from our White House reporters and European correspondents. Photographs from Mr. Trump’s weeklong trip are here.

Trump says NATO countries agreed to spend significantly more on defense
Continue reading the main story
Photo

Mr. Trump with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, left, and the national security adviser, John R. Bolton, on Thursday. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times
Mr. Trump strongly recommitted American support for NATO on Thursday, saying that he had won great concessions from allies on military spending, though he did not offer any details.

“The United States was not being treated fairly, but now we are,” the president said at a news conference after the NATO leaders held an emergency meeting to address Mr. Trump’s complaints. “I believe in NATO.”

A short time later, Emmanuel Macron, the French president, said other countries had simply agreed to keep previous commitments to increase military spending to 2 percent of gross domestic product by 2024.

“A communiqué was issued yesterday,” Mr. Macron said. “This communiqué is clear. It reaffirms the 2 percent by 2024 commitments. That’s all.”

If Mr. Trump’s public remarks were friendly, the tone behind closed doors was much harsher.

According to a person briefed on Mr. Trump’s meeting with other NATO leaders, Mr. Trump said that if the other countries did not meet the 2 percent standard by January, the United States “would go it alone.”

What that would mean was not clear to the officials who were present. White House officials did not immediately respond to requests to explain Mr. Trump’s comment, or to say whether he was suggesting that the United States could withdraw from NATO.

The French president dismissed such concerns as unfounded.

“Generally I do not comment on what goes on behind the scenes, but at no moment did President Trump — neither bilaterally nor multilaterally — say that he was intending to leave NATO,” Mr. Macron said.

The allies had agreed to spend 2 percent of gross national product on defense by 2024, but Mr. Trump has demanded that they meet that threshold right away.

“What they’re doing is spending at a much faster clip, they’re going up to the 2 percent level,” he said, adding that he had told his counterparts the day before that “we should be at 4 percent.”

“The additional money that they’re willing to put up has been really amazing,” Mr. Trump said, without addressing a timetable or amounts. “Yesterday I let them know that I was extremely unhappy with what was happening and they have substantially upped their commitment.”

Mr. Trump has not held a news conference on American soil for more than a year. But on Thursday, flanked by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and John R. Bolton, his national security adviser, he took questions from reporters for over a half an hour.

He dismissed any concern that his relationship with Russia was too cozy or that his relationship with allies was too harsh, despite his statements questioning the value of NATO and castigating its members.

There was “great, very collegial spirit in that room,” he said.

Mr. Trump once again hailed himself as a “very stable genius” and took “total credit” for persuading his allies to increase military spending. And he took credit for other NATO countries having increased their military spending by $33 billion in the last year.

“I don‘t think that’s helping Russia,” he said. “I think NATO is much stronger now than it was two days ago.”

Mr. Trump threw the meeting into turmoil on Thursday by using a session on Ukraine and Georgia, countries partially occupied by Russia, as another chance to complain about NATO military spending. That prompted the leaders to convene an emergency budget session.

— Katie Rogers, Julie Hirschfeld Davis and Steven Erlanger

 Presidents have been trying unsuccessfully for years to get Germany and other rich NATO Nations to pay more toward their protection from Russia. They pay only a fraction of their cost. The U.S. pays tens of Billions of Dollars too much to subsidize Europe, and loses Big on Trade!

1:03 PM - Jul 12, 2018
36.9K
14.1K people are talking about this
Twitter Ads info and privacy
Russian gas pipeline to Germany is a big problem, Trump says

Working on the North Stream 2 pipeline in Sassnitz, Germany, in 2017. Credit Stefan Sauer/DPA, via Associated Press
At his news conference and on Twitter, Mr