FRESH HOPE Thai cave boys could be rescued by mystery SECRET PASSAGE after they hear dogs barking despite being a half mile underground

The 12 brave lads have been trapped inside the dark and polluted tunnels in Chiang Rai for nearly a fortnight

A GROUP of boys trapped inside a cave network in Thailand could be rescued via a secret passage - as it has emerged they have heard dogs barking on the surface.

The 12 lads, aged between 11 and 16, and their football coach, 26, have been stranded inside the dark and polluted tunnels in Chiang Rai for nearly a fortnight.

But officials now believe there could be a “chimney hole” leading to the surface after the group heard dogs barking, roosters crowing and kids playing despite being half a mile underground.

Governor Narongsak Osatanakorn, who is in charge of the rescue operation, said 30 teams are scouring the mountainside for the air hole.

He says this secret passage would help explain why the group have been able to breath for so long.

The chimney hole would allow a crack team of rescuers to drill down to the brave boys instead of having to teach them how to swim and dive through the “extremely dangerous” cave network.

The terrified boys have had to move 600ft deeper into the cave after flood water was accidently pumped BACK into the tunnel.

Following the blunder, blamed on “unregistered” volunteers, the group are now perched on a ledge known as “Women’s Boobs”, officials said.

What we know so far:

The football team made up of 12 boys aged between 11 and 16 and their coach ran into trouble on 23 June.
They were visiting the cave network in Chiang Rai when monsoon rains trapped them deep inside.
They were found safe on Monday night by British divers, who discovered them huddled together on a ledge about 1.2miles inside the network.
They are all in reasonable health - one diver said they were "very weak, but alive".
The military is sending in provisions to last them up to four months while they assess rescue options.
The children are being taught how to dive and have been given masks to practice breathing 
The safest option is for them to walk out but this is impossible due to floodwater blocking sections of the route.
Osatanakorn said the murky water had been diverted back into the cave by mistake.

He said: “They may have some belief that their technique is effective for ground water drainage, but anything that is not in the plan must be discussed with us first.”

Around 1.6million litres of water are being pumped out of the cave every hour – as the weather in northern Thailand has remained dry for the last few days.

But the country is enduring its rainy season and torrential showers are expected to batter Chiang Rai province in the coming days.

Osatanakorn said the rescue team is “racing against time."

He added:  “We’re trying to pump water out but more and more is coming in from above and below. Our biggest concern now is the weather.”

Most of the children can't swim and are being taught to scuba dive by rescuers in a desperate bid to free them before downpours make their escape impossible.

Experts say divers have required three hours to reach the boys, located about 2.5 miles from the mouth of the cave.

It has emerged the boys visited the cave to attempt a local initiation rite in which they had to scrawl their names on a wall at the end of the tunnel.

If they were to try and swim out, the children would have to battle currents in the water which is almost certainly polluted with rotting poo from humans and animals such as rats and bats.

Deputy Prime Minister Prawit Wongsuwan said: "The water is very strong and space is narrow. Extracting the children takes a lot of people."

The “incredibly dangerous” escape route involves swimming through narrow gaps unassisted in dark water which is a challenge for even experienced divers.

Some gaps are so tight the children will have to take off their scuba gear to squeeze past.

Engineers are threading a fibre-optic cable through narrow shafts and chambers of the cave that will allow direct communication with the group, reports The Times.

Yesterday, Osatanakor said the boys will be taken out in stages depending on their physical fitness and mental strength.

He said: "All 13 may not come out at the same time."

The governor said the kids and their coach have been practising with masks but have not yet attempted any practice dives.

He said it is unknown when the rescue could be attempted, but it is unlikely to be today as "it has to be 100 per cent safe".

Seven divers, including a doctor and a nurse, joined the group inside the Tham Luang caves in northern Thailand.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6701052/thai-cave-boys-rescued-by-mystery-chimney-hole/