Ascot 2018: Tip Two Win is the perfect giant-killer 

It is not hard to envisage racing’s big beasts, John Gosden and Frankie Dettori, Aidan O’Brien and Ryan Moore, fighting for the lion’s share of the spoils once Royal Ascot, the finest five days of racing in the world, begins on Tuesday.

However, on the first day of this extraordinary festival of sport, pageantry and fashion, David can slay Goliath – well, at least delay the Clarehaven and Ballydoyle bandwagons – as Tip Two Win, who fits the bill of a ‘David’ both physically and metaphorically, is fancied to win the St James’s Palace Stakes.

The colt, trained a few miles downstream from Lambourn, in Great Shefford by Roger Teal, brings the best form to the race, having split Saxon Warrior and the Derby winner Masar in the 2,000 Guineas, with Roaring Lion, the Derby runner-up, also behind him.

He started at 50-1 that day owing to a combination of his relatively-unknown trainer and his unusual preparation – winning two races in Doha. There seemed no fluke about his run at Newmarket though, and even at 5-1 on Tuesday he still represents value. If Saxon Warrior had come straight here from the Guineas what price would he be?

Punters, it seems, have latched on to the Gosden-Dettori runner Without Parole. He is unbeaten, true, but the support has been based on reputation alone, after he scrambled home in a Listed race at Sandown Park last time.

The Irish 2,000 Guineas winner Romanised finished off his race really strongly at The Curragh, where he beat O’Brien’s U S Navy Flag by 2¼ lengths going away. On a slightly tenuous line through his two-year-old form with Masar, Ken Condon’s colt may have to play second fiddle to Tip Two Win, although a victory for him would also represent a triumph for a small yard.

“He seems in great order,” said Teal, who was trying to take his mind off the race by assembling Tuesday’s picnic when we spoke on Monday. “We’ve freshened him up and trained him for the race. He is working well, eating well and the form has worked out superb. If he can reproduce Newmarket and get a bit of luck he has to be in the mix.”

Teal has yet to saddle a Royal Ascot winner but has had a third in the Britannia Handicap at 100-1. “Tip Two Win is just a smidgen over 15 hands, he only turned three a week after the Guineas and has filled out a little bit.”

There is every chance that the star horse of the week will emerge from the ranks of sprinters. Lady Aurelia made a strong case for that accolade last year in the Kings Stand Stakes, a title she defends on Tuesday, and the year before in the Queen Mary. Both those victories were preceded by wins at Keeneland in April, but she looked a bit flat there this spring. As much as this is her race, I prefer Battaash.

The Charlie Hills-trained four-year-old’s only defeat in two seasons came in last year’s Nunthorpe when he boiled over. He returned to his best to beat Marsha by four lengths in the Prix de l’Abbaye and won the Temple Stakes recently, despite doing everything wrong.

O’Brien and Moore have the favourite in the first two races, with Rhododendron and Sergei Prokofiev, either of which could get the pair off to a flier. Rhododendron showed a good attitude to beat the hard-to-win-with seven-year-old Lightning Spear by a short-head in the Lockinge, but it is the progressive form of the Franco-Spanish raider Recoletos, a comfortable winner of the Prix d’Ispahan last time, who catches the eye.

Accidental Agent looks terrific each-way value. Not beaten by a million miles after racing on the slower ground in the Lockinge, he loves Ascot, does not mind the ground and according to his trainer is finally fit.

The week’s two main protagonists, O’Brien and Gosden, have their first major head-to-head in the Coventry, a race O’Brien has won eight times to Gosden’s one.

Sergei Prokofiev looked smart over five at Naas and being by Scat Daddy, he should improve for the six furlongs. Calyx has been the talking horse since his impressive Newmarket debut and as it would not be Gosden’s normal way of working to bring a juvenile here 10 days after debut, that can be taken as a tip in itself. 

The Queen has a good each-way chance with Fabricate in the closing race, the Wolferton Stakes, but I dare says the racecourse’s owner will be more than a little interested to see whether anything drops out of Wednesday’s Royal Hunt Cup, allowing her Seniority, first reserve for the race, to make the final cut.

