Comcast ups Sky bid to $34 billion, escalating battle with Rupert Murdoch
Comcast reportedly increased its bid for Sky to $34 billion Thursday, topping Fox's $32 billion offer.

The quick counteroffer suggests that the war to seize control of Britain's biggest pay-TV company is heating up, since the previous bid was $31 billion from Comcast in April.

The increased pace of bidding caused Sky shares to rise 3.2 percent in London Thursday, with investors anticipating further bids, Bloomberg reports.

Neither Comcast nor Sky immediately responded to requests for comment.

the-avengers-assembled
23
How to watch every Marvel Cinematic Universe film in the right order
Fox already owns 39.14 percent of Sky, but this effort to get a stronger hold on its entertainment assets is an element of Disney's possible $71.3 billion Fox takeover.

In the US, it has been in a separate bidding war with Comcast -- the nation's largest cable TV provider -- to buy 21st Century Fox's film and TV studios.

Fox owns major franchises including X-Men, Deadpool, Kingsmen and Planet of the Apes. It also owns animated films such as Ice Age and TV assets including The Simpsons and network FX.


Now Playing: How to watch every Marvel movie in the correct order
2:54 
  Taboola Sponsored Links by  YOU MAY ALSO LIKE
This Woman Reads 100 Books A Month
Sponsored by Blinkist
If you own a Computer then you have to try this Game
Sponsored by Delta Wars
10 Countries That Don’t Want You To Visit
Sponsored by Bored Articles
New Website Finds the Cheapest Flights from Duong Ton Dan
Sponsored by Trips Shop
With apologies to “Animal House’s” Otter, Brett Kavanaugh’s nomination to the Supreme Court is not the time “a really futile and stupid gesture be done on somebody’s part.”

Then again, Otter’s frat brother Bluto did go on to become a United States senator, so maybe it makes sense. I refer to the decision of Senate Democrats to wage a tooth-and-nail battle to oppose Kavanaugh, an effort that is likely doomed to fail and equally likely to hurt Democratic chances in the fall. Who knew Chuck Schumer was so content with his job as as Senate minority leader?

Let’s count the ways in which the Democrats aren’t helping themselves.

Kavanaugh will almost certainly  be confirmed. Democrats who had pinned their hopes on flipping Senators Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski probably aren’t going to get their wish, since both Republican moderates voted to confirm Kavanaugh to his current judgeship in 2006 and have since spoken approvingly of his nomination. Rand Paul can also be counted on to feign political independence, but he usually falls into line.

Of course it’s possible Kavanaugh will make a bad public impression, like Robert Bork. Or maybe there will be a #MeToo revelation, like Clarence Thomas. Or maybe Democrats will figure out a way to kick a vote past the midterms. In which case, Democrats can seize their chances. For now, however, the first question Democrats ought to ask themselves is whether they really have political capital to waste on a losing battle.


