Donald Trump enjoys poll bump after Kim Jong-un summit

The majority of Americans believe Donald Trump’s summit with Kim Jong-un was a good idea, according to a new poll, sending the president’s approval rating to its highest point this year.

Days earlier it emerged that Mr Trump’s popularity among Republicans after 500 days in office is second only to that of George W Bush, whose standing benefited from the unifying effect of the 9/11 attacks.

With a Republican approval rating of 87 percent, Mr Trump was more popular within his own party than John Kennedy or Barack Obama, according to the latest polling by Gallup.

Analysts say that although the president remains a divisive figure within the country, his popularity within the Republican base has strengthened his grip on the party.

Washington insiders believe the numbers may dissuade a primary challenge ahead of the 2020 election and raise a growing prospect of a second Trump term.

And on Thursday, a poll published by the independent Monmouth University Polling Institute put his overall approval rating at 43 percent. That marks a slight increase on April’s figure and is level with his highest score, recorded in March 2017, (although other polls with different methodologies have put him a point higher in the past month).

The survey was conducted by telephone in the two days after Mr Trump met Kim in Singapore.

It found that although 71 percent of respondents said the meeting was a good idea, and about 46 percent said it made the president look stronger – compared with 13 percent who said he appeared weaker – they said much the same about Kim.

Patrick Murray, director of the independent Monmouth University Polling Institute, said: “The event was clearly a good photo op for both leaders, but the top goal from the US perspective was reducing the nuclear threat posed by Kim’s regime.

“The public is more optimistic than pessimistic that this will be an outcome of these talks, but only just slightly.”