ADV Films
2000-10-22 03:52 UTC-8
A.D. Vision (known simply as ADV and also referred to as ADV Films) was an American multimedia entertainment studio that served as the 
largest American and British anime distributor in the late 20th to early 21st centuries. Headquartered in Houston, Texas, 
ADV Films was formed in 1992 by video game fan John Ledford and anime fans Matt Greenfield and David Williams. 
The company spent the next 17 years in the fields of home video production and distribution, broadcast television, theatrical film distribution, 
merchandising, original productions, magazine and comic book publishing. In 2002, most of ADV Films' back catalog were used to program its new channel, 
the Anime Network.

For over 15 years, ADV released successful anime series, such as Neon Genesis Evangelion, Robotech, RahXephon, Full Metal Panic, 
Azumanga Daioh, Elfen Lied, Gantz, Red Garden and Le Chevalier D'Eon. The company maintained offices in North America, Europe and Asia. 
In addition to North America, ADV Films distributed their home media releases in the United Kingdom, Italy, and Germany. 
The company's fortunes declined in the mid-2000s due to low sales. With ADV's fire sale of its assets in 2009, 
they were spun off into five different companies: Section23 Films, Sentai Filmworks, AEsir Holdings, Valkyrie Media Partners and Seraphim Digital; 
which became subsidiaries of AEsir Media. Ledford, Greenfield and Williams continue to work for these companies as mentors and creative 
consultants and most of ADV's back catalog were relicensed by Discotek Media, Sentai, Maiden Japan and Funimation. In 2013, 
Sentai Filmworks revived the ADV Films name to re-release Elfen Lied on Blu-ray. 

In a long press release, ADV Films has announced a few new titles and releases. The first product announced was The Slayers DVD.

Excerpt from PR:
Slayers: Book of Spells will contain the three OVAs previously released on VHS: The Scary Chimera Plan, Jeffery's Knighthood, and Mirror, Mirror. 
This DVD will have the original Japanese version with English subtitles and the English-dubbed version of the OVAs. 
DVD extras also include the original trailers and a "Production Portfolio" for The Slayers titles.

The DVD is bilingual and will be released next month with a SRP of $29.98.
Second, announced for a release in February, 2001, is the final VHS in the Bubblegum Crisis: Tokyo 2040 series titled Deathstrike!

Excerpt from the PR below:
It has been a great ride, but all good things must end, and in February 2001, 
ADV Films will release this last volume of the widely popular anime series Bubblegum Crisis: Tokyo 2040. 
Deathstrike will be released on digitally mastered VHS Hi-Fi, in two versions: English-dubbed and Japanese with English subtitles. 
The tape will contain the concluding 2 episodes of the series.

Both Releases will be on VHS. The English dub with a SRP of $19.98 and the English sub with a SRP of $29.95.
And last, the 5th volume in the Lost Universe series will also be released in February, 2001 in both VHS and DVD format.

Official PR:
Can our heroes survive a long night of laser blasts, psychotic ships, and light whips? ADV Films won't let you down. 
Don't miss out in February 2001, when ADV releases the 5th video in this spectacular series, on VHS in English dubbed and English subtitled versions. 
The Lost Universe Volume 5 DVD will be on the shelves in March, and will contain the English dubbed version, along with the original Japanese version, 
with English subtitles.

The English dub VHS will have a SRP of $19.98, the English sub VHS, SRP: $29.95 and the DVD (Multilingual) with a SRP of $29.98.

