How do auctioneers differentiate fakes from masterpieces? 

 13 April 2018 11:07am 


Authenticating works of art is integral to the reputation of an auction house, but how do experts spot a masterpiece among the fakes?

When in 1952, Patti Page sang How much is that doggie in the window? the chances are that she was not expecting the answer to be more than half a million pounds. But that is exactly what happened this March at a Cambridge auction house when a previously unknown portrait of an Italian mastiff sold for a headline-grabbing £570,000.

The story of this remarkable painting – a beautifully evocative work by 17th-century Italian baroque master Giovanni Francesco Barbieri, known as Il Guercino – provides a unique insight into one of the most fascinating aspects of the art world: the discovery of the unknown masterpiece. It also demonstrates the vital role played by art experts in the process of authentication.
"The trusted word of a recognised expert – and the reputation of the auction house – gives buyers the confidence to spend large sums of money on works"

The auction house, Cheffins – specialist in property as well as fine art since 1825 – discovered the painting at a Suffolk country house in 2016. But it took two years of research to confirm that the auctioneer’s original excitement was not misplaced. In that time three separate art experts in three different countries all agreed that the work was an original Il Guercino, not a later copy.

“With paintings in particular, you have to approach with a healthy scepticism,” warns Martin Millard, director of fine art at Cheffins. “There are a lot of fakes and forgeries out there.” That is why the trained eyes of art historians are so important. Even with today’s scientific technologies – such as x-rays and chemical paint analysis – it often comes down to dedicated scholars poring over individual brushstrokes.

Sometimes there is only one foundation able to authenticate a work. This was the case with a previously unrecorded drawing by Alberto Giacometti that Cheffins sold last year for £130,000. But with older works, it is more likely to involve individual scholars and academics. The Il Guercino painting was confirmed as the real deal by Dr Nicholas Turner, the leading authority on Il Guercino, as well as John Somerville, senior curator of the Lobkowicz Collection, Prague, and Italian art historian Dr Francesco Petrucci, who hopes to include the painting in an exhibition in Turin.

“From an auctioneer’s perspective, authentication is critical to everything we do,” says Millard. “We put our reputation on the line with every object that goes under the hammer.” Authenticity is vital for buyers too. While an undiscovered work by a big-name artist can set hearts aflutter, it is the trusted word of a recognised expert – and the reputation of the auction house – that gives buyers the confidence to spend large sums of money on works they may never even have seen in the flesh.
"It took two years of research to confirm that the auctioneer’s original excitement was not misplaced"

This is nothing new in the art world. “A good Rothko will always be a good Rothko, even in a turbulent market,” says Michelle Swann, head of UK sales at online auction aggregator Barnebys. “Someone lucky enough to be able to afford such a thing will have their trusted dealer check it our first before purchasing.” But the internet has opened up the market, making it much easier for buyers to find out what’s for sale across the world. In addition, as Swann explains: “The beauty of the digital age means there is nowhere to hide. If someone is behaving unethically they will soon be caught out.”

Even with a cast-iron authentication, valuation can still be complicated, especially for very rare works. This was precisely the case with the Il Guercino dog portrait. Several other works by the Italian master do include dogs, but there is only one other canine portrait by Il Guercino currently known to scholars: that is Portrait of the Aldrovandi Dog, which was sold at auction in the 1970s.

And that uncertainty is part of what make the whole process so exciting – not only for prospective buyers but for auctioneers and academics too. “As an art professional, this is what you live for,” says Millard. “You spend your life trying to uncover these things. It can be frustrating and heart-breaking, but also incredibly exciting – and that’s true whether it’s something worth a few hundred pounds or a few hundred thousand.”

You can find items of all values, from modern antiques to established masterpieces, by exploring Barnebys, the online auction aggregator that brings the world’s most trusted auctions together in one place
