Regulate social media companies to prevent damage to young people's mental health, says Royal College of Psychiatrists

Social media companies must be regulated to stop them damaging young people's mental health, according to the Royal College of Psychiatrists.

Self-regulation by the industry is not working and children are being exposed to harmful online environments, Dr Louise Theodosiou, member of the Child and Adolescent Faculty at the RCP told The Daily Telegraph.

It comes after this newspaper launched the Duty of Care campaign calling on ministers to make social media and online gaming companies subject to a statutory duty to protect children from harms such as addiction, bullying and grooming when using their services. 

Ministers are considering new measures to rein in the worst excesses of online tech companies amid  fears a generation of young people is being harmed by unregulated use of social media and online gaming platforms.

“Self-regulation has failed and legislation needs to be introduced”, said Dr Theodosiou. 

“We [the RCP] do want there to be restrictions on content. Where there are age restrictions on opening an account or viewing content - we absolutely want that guidance to be followed”, she said.

She said that in the same way that young children would not be allowed to play unsupervised in the real world, they should not be allowed unfettered access to the Internet.

There should be more identity checks on sites like Facebook to ensure that users are old enough to access the service, she added.

She also said that sites need to act more swiftly when content is reported.

Teenage girls in particular are suffering the effects of negative online environments, including seeing content which promoted anorexia, she said.

“When damaging content is reported we need companies to respond immediately”, she said.

“For example, on Twitter if you report a tweet we need rapid response to that so people can get the message that abusive behaviour, like linking to a pro-anorexia website, is not acceptable.

“We need robust responses to show what's acceptable online in the same way that we do offline.”