MINE'S BIGGER THAN YOURS! Billionaire Spurs owner’s £113m superyacht joined by Travelex founder’s £75m megaboat on Thames

The two superyachts were seen jostling for position beside Tower Bridge in Central London yesterday

TWO billionaire businessmen had a multi-million pound yacht-off in London yesterday as they both jostled for position on the Thames.

Spurs owner Joe Lewis' prided vessel Ariva was joined near Tower Bridge by the £75million Elandess, owned by currency exchange boss Sir Lloyd Dorfman, founder of Travelex.



The sister ships were built by German manufacturer Abeking And Rausmussen in Lemwerder.

Mr Lewis, 81, who bought his beloved club Tottenham Hotspur in 2001 after amassing his wealth in catering and currency trading, took delivery of the massive 321ft-long ship last year.

It was sailed up the Thames earlier this week, arriving at Butler's Wharf on Sunday after making a deft U-turn on the river.

But it was partnered in the prime Central London spot yesterday by the younger Elandess — which took to the water for the first time earlier this year.

Little is known about what is inside the two ships although the 321ft-long Ariva, which took three years to complete, does house a tennis court and can sleep up to 16 guests.

Mr Lewis, who lives beside Sean Connery in the Bahamas, came from humble cockney beginnings.

He was born above a pub in East London and left school at 15 to work in his family's cafe as a waiter, earning £6 a week.

But he later established more businesses in London's West End under the name Tavistock Banqueting.

He opened restaurants including the Northumberland Grand, which was the first fancy dress-themed restaurant in London aimed at tourists.

From there he developed the Beefeater, the Cockney, the Caledonian and the Hanover Grand.

He managed his first super club called The Talk Of The Town in the 60s, where the likes of Frank Sinatra, Diana Ross and Tom Jones performed.

At the Hanover Grand, Joe granted The Nolans their first ever live show and he gave Planet Hollywood and Hard Rock founder Robert Earl his first job.

https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/6702779/spurs-owner-yacht-joined-by-travelex-founder-river-thames/