Miss America could've never survived the #MeToo era if it kept scoring women's bodies

The Miss America pageant this country has known for nearly a century is finally dead. Good riddance. 

On Tuesday, Gretchen Carlson, Miss America 1989 and chair of the Miss America Organization, appeared on Good Morning America to deliver the news: The annual televised event is no longer a pageant but a competition, and women won't be judged on their physical appearance. 
So what began as a swimsuit pageant and moneymaking venture for Atlantic City businessmen in 1921 will no longer feature women parading across a stage in a bikini just to win a college scholarship. 

"We've heard from a lot of young women who say, 'We'd love to be part of your program, but we don't want to be out there in high heels and a swimsuit,'" Carlson said on GMA. "So, guess what? You don't have to do that anymore."
Carlson, a former Fox News anchor who sued her employer for sexual harassment in 2016, deserves credit for steering the nonprofit organization into the 21st century. Yet there's also frankly no way Miss America could've survived the Trump presidency and #MeToo era peddling the message that assessing a woman's worth and potential should, at some point, involve scoring her body. 

Women are now running for elected office in unprecedented numbers — and with much higher expectations for our civil society and politics. They are fueling the resistance and leading the movement against gun violence. They're crying out #MeToo and demanding to be heard. This is not a world in which women want to spend their Sunday evening watching other women vie for a sparkly crown and scholarship money dressed in evening gowns and bathing suits. 
Back in 2015, when I wrote the Real Miss America series for Mashable and argued it was time for the then-pageant to ditch its obsession with contestants' physical appearance, plenty of people still clung to the nostalgia of what Miss America represented — a feel-good, live TV event that celebrated traditional, narrow ideals of femininity. 

But nostalgia, as I've written before, can be a lie and a weapon used against the most vulnerable among us. When we long for a simpler or more conventional past, we tend to forget or ignore how those moments were also shaped by someone else's silence and oppression
While Miss America afforded countless women the chance to dream of a bigger, brighter future for themselves, it also pretended as if women with physical disabilities, or queer identities, or fat bodies, for example, just didn't exist. Women with those bodies weren't worth seeing, no matter if they'd made invaluable contributions to their communities or possessed remarkable talent. 

Carlson suggested that would change starting with the Miss America competition scheduled for this September, emphasizing to Good Morning America's Amy Robach that the nonprofit is embracing transparency and inclusivity. 

"We’re experiencing a cultural revolution in our country with women finding the courage to stand up and have their voices heard on many issues," Carlson said in a statement posted to the Miss America Organization's website. "Miss America is proud to evolve as an organization and join this empowerment movement." 

The bathing suit portion will be replaced with an "interactive session" in which contestants tell judges about their achievements, life goals, and how they'll use their "talents, passion, and ambition to perform the job of Miss America." During what was once the evening gown segment, participants can wear anything they like as they discuss their "social impact initiatives." 

Carlson's sales pitch is compelling, though we'll know how committed the Miss America Organization is to its new vision come September. Perhaps the concept of a competition amongst women, under the guise of providing scholarship money, is simply too flawed to survive the 21st century, much less the #MeToo era. It's also quite possible that the nonprofit organization won't practice inclusivity but instead use it as a buzzword to lure an audience alongside new advertisers. 

But if the organization truly wants to celebrate young women's achievements and potential by putting diverse bodies up on its stage for national recognition, that's a version of Miss America that could make a a real difference in the way we understand what it means to be a modern woman
