Gaming technology is constantly evolving and it just got better
It’s been almost 80 years since thousands of people lined up to challenge a computer to a game of math at the New York World’s Fair in Queens, NY. (The computer won almost every time, surprisingly.) Back then, the curious spilled into the fair to experience progress firsthand, which included a new way to play games. Little did those early gamers know they had participated in the birth of a $75 billion global industry driven by technological innovation that has reshaped our notions of sports, film, and even reality. 
From curiosity to habit, gaming has been fully integrated into our lives, with 1.8 billion peopleplaying worldwide. While the early decades of technological innovation spurred the ubiquity of consoles, advances in AR and mobility, and accessories like the latest wireless mouse and keyboard from Logitech are pushing gaming into its next phase. We’ve rounded up some of the most significant new technologies that are evolving the industry and changing the way we play. 
Augmented Reality
Whether they’re avatars or adorable anime characters, augmented reality has changed the way we play. In 2016, AR was a $1.2 billion business, capturing the imaginations of kids and adults who understood that a little extra something layered on top of the real world was a whole lot of fun—especially when it comes to gaming. 
As investors continue to pour money into AR, we can expect to see more innovations that transport us into other worlds on PC, console and mobile devices. The constant improvement of cameras, along with the ability to measure depth and 3D objects, will only improve AR experiences. The result? A range that has gone from flat animated images to realistic avatars that can blend seamlessly into complex game settings. 
Virtual Reality
Still in its nascent stage, virtual reality adoption is all about the long-term game. More companies are producing VR headsets and goggles to increase adoption and filmmakers are working with gaming companies to master the craft of VR storytelling and settings. While the average gamer playing on a console in their family’s home basement isn’t necessarily using a VR headset yet, improved headset technology has piqued interest. 
Artificial Intelligence
When it comes to artificial intelligence, the gaming world is considered a leader with other industries following suit. Game developers began experimenting with AI characters in the mid-1980s and have been working to perfect their emotional depth and interactivity ever since. The majority of games are built with scripted algorithms that translate to a certain level of natural interactivity, but recent investments in innovation are paving the way for true machine learning to take over. 
Mobility
Mobile is a huge growth area for gaming, with this sector of the industry increasing more than 20% between 2015 and 2016. While phones offer mass gaming experiences that catch fire globally, more dedicated players prefer the interactivity and controls associated with PCs and consoles. Mobile devices that feature detachable controllers allow for single and multiplayer games that mimic PC and console experiences. Another bonus is that games don’t stop when you leave your home. 
Wireless Technology 
Gone are the days when frustrated gamers would begrudgingly pause their games to untangle wires in hopes of finding the source of a dead mouse and keyboard. By using their LIGHTSPEED technology that provides an end-to-end wireless connection, Logitech G gives gamers a way to use their keyboards and mouse in ways never thought possible before. 
The G613 Wireless Mechanical Gaming Keyboard and G603 Wireless Gaming Mouse are game-changers across the board — killer battery life, ergonomically designed, and optimized to deliver pro-grade wireless performance that is actually faster than many wired gaming devices. Logitech G’s latest releases are a far cry from the technology of the past, allowing multi-host connectivity, programmable keys, custom in-app commands, and LIGHTSPEED in lieu of Bluetooth. This isn’t your 1980s tech—it’s the tech of future right now. 